511. Datenbank Spektrum. 2017;17(1):29-34. doi: 10.1007/s13222-016-0245-2. Epub 2017 
Jan 18.

LIVIVO - the Vertical Search Engine for Life Sciences.

Müller B(1), Poley C(1), Pössel J(1), Hagelstein A(1), Gübitz T(1).

Author information:
(1)Applied Research and Innovation, German National Library of Medicine ZB MED - 
Information Centre for Life Sciences, Gleueler Str. 60, 50931 Cologne, North 
Rhine-Westphalia Germany.

The explosive growth of literature and data in the life sciences challenges 
researchers to keep track of current advancements in their disciplines. Novel 
approaches in the life science like the One Health paradigm require integrated 
methodologies in order to link and connect heterogeneous information from 
databases and literature resources. Current publications in the life sciences 
are increasingly characterized by the employment of trans-disciplinary 
methodologies comprising molecular and cell biology, genetics, genomic, 
epigenomic, transcriptional and proteomic high throughput technologies with data 
from humans, plants, and animals. The literature search engine LIVIVO empowers 
retrieval functionality by incorporating various literature resources from 
medicine, health, environment, agriculture and nutrition. LIVIVO is developed 
in-house by ZB MED - Information Centre for Life Sciences. It provides a 
user-friendly and usability-tested search interface with a corpus of 55 Million 
citations derived from 50 databases. Standardized application programming 
interfaces are available for data export and high throughput retrieval. The 
search functions allow for semantic retrieval with filtering options based on 
life science entities. The service oriented architecture of LIVIVO uses four 
different implementation layers to deliver search services. A Knowledge 
Environment is developed by ZB MED to deal with the heterogeneity of data as an 
integrative approach to model, store, and link semantic concepts within 
literature resources and databases. Future work will focus on the exploitation 
of life science ontologies and on the employment of NLP technologies in order to 
improve query expansion, filters in faceted search, and concept based relevancy 
rankings in LIVIVO.

DOI: 10.1007/s13222-016-0245-2
PMCID: PMC5750838
PMID: 29368755