414. IEEE Trans Image Process. 2007 Apr;16(4):1168-81. doi: 10.1109/tip.2006.891352.

Semantic-based surveillance video retrieval.

Hu W(1), Xie D, Fu Z, Zeng W, Maybank S.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China. wmhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Visual surveillance produces large amounts of video data. Effective indexing and 
retrieval from surveillance video databases are very important. Although there 
are many ways to represent the content of video clips in current video retrieval 
algorithms, there still exists a semantic gap between users and retrieval 
systems. Visual surveillance systems supply a platform for investigating 
semantic-based video retrieval. In this paper, a semantic-based video retrieval 
framework for visual surveillance is proposed. A cluster-based tracking 
algorithm is developed to acquire motion trajectories. The trajectories are then 
clustered hierarchically using the spatial and temporal information, to learn 
activity models. A hierarchical structure of semantic indexing and retrieval of 
object activities, where each individual activity automatically inherits all the 
semantic descriptions of the activity model to which it belongs, is proposed for 
accessing video clips and individual objects at the semantic level. The proposed 
retrieval framework supports various queries including queries by keywords, 
multiple object queries, and queries by sketch. For multiple object queries, 
succession and simultaneity restrictions, together with depth and breadth first 
orders, are considered. For sketch-based queries, a method for matching 
trajectories drawn by users to spatial trajectories is proposed. The 
effectiveness and efficiency of our framework are tested in a crowded traffic 
scene.

DOI: 10.1109/tip.2006.891352
PMID: 17405446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]