352. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020181. Epub 2011 May 25.

Using workflows to explore and optimise named entity recognition for chemistry.

Kolluru B(1), Hawizy L, Murray-Rust P, Tsujii J, Ananiadou S.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining, Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. 
balakrishna.kolluru@manchester.ac.uk

Chemistry text mining tools should be interoperable and adaptable regardless of 
system-level implementation, installation or even programming issues. We aim to 
abstract the functionality of these tools from the underlying implementation via 
reconfigurable workflows for automatically identifying chemical names. To 
achieve this, we refactored an established named entity recogniser (in the 
chemistry domain), OSCAR and studied the impact of each component on the net 
performance. We developed two reconfigurable workflows from OSCAR using an 
interoperable text mining framework, U-Compare. These workflows can be altered 
using the drag-&-drop mechanism of the graphical user interface of U-Compare. 
These workflows also provide a platform to study the relationship between text 
mining components such as tokenisation and named entity recognition (using 
maximum entropy Markov model (MEMM) and pattern recognition based classifiers). 
Results indicate that, for chemistry in particular, eliminating noise generated 
by tokenisation techniques lead to a slightly better performance than others, in 
terms of named entity recognition (NER) accuracy. Poor tokenisation translates 
into poorer input to the classifier components which in turn leads to an 
increase in Type I or Type II errors, thus, lowering the overall performance. On 
the Sciborg corpus, the workflow based system, which uses a new tokeniser whilst 
retaining the same MEMM component, increases the F-score from 82.35% to 84.44%. 
On the PubMed corpus, it recorded an F-score of 84.84% as against 84.23% by 
OSCAR.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020181
PMCID: PMC3102085
PMID: 21633495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.