54. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Dec 13;17(1):528. doi: 10.1186/s12859-016-1396-8.

Microbial phenomics information extractor (MicroPIE): a natural language 
processing tool for the automated acquisition of prokaryotic phenotypic 
characters from text sources.

Mao J(1), Moore LR(2), Blank CE(3), Wu EH(1), Ackerman M(2), Ranade S(1), Cui 
H(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Information, University of Arizona, Tucson, 85721, AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern Maine, Portland, 
04103, ME, USA.
(3)Department of Geosciences, University of Montana, Missoula, 59812, MT, USA.
(4)School of Information, University of Arizona, Tucson, 85721, AZ, USA. 
hongcui@email.arizona.edu.

BACKGROUND: The large-scale analysis of phenomic data (i.e., full phenotypic 
traits of an organism, such as shape, metabolic substrates, and growth 
conditions) in microbial bioinformatics has been hampered by the lack of tools 
to rapidly and accurately extract phenotypic data from existing legacy text in 
the field of microbiology. To quickly obtain knowledge on the distribution and 
evolution of microbial traits, an information extraction system needed to be 
developed to extract phenotypic characters from large numbers of taxonomic 
descriptions so they can be used as input to existing phylogenetic analysis 
software packages.
RESULTS: We report the development and evaluation of Microbial Phenomics 
Information Extractor (MicroPIE, version 0.1.0). MicroPIE is a natural language 
processing application that uses a robust supervised classification algorithm 
(Support Vector Machine) to identify characters from sentences in prokaryotic 
taxonomic descriptions, followed by a combination of algorithms applying 
linguistic rules with groups of known terms to extract characters as well as 
character states. The input to MicroPIE is a set of taxonomic descriptions 
(clean text). The output is a taxon-by-character matrix-with taxa in the rows 
and a set of 42 pre-defined characters (e.g., optimum growth temperature) in the 
columns. The performance of MicroPIE was evaluated against a gold standard 
matrix and another student-made matrix. Results show that, compared to the gold 
standard, MicroPIE extracted 21 characters (50%) with a Relaxed F1 score > 0.80 
and 16 characters (38%) with Relaxed F1 scores ranging between 0.50 and 0.80. 
Inclusion of a character prediction component (SVM) improved the overall 
performance of MicroPIE, notably the precision. Evaluated against the same gold 
standard, MicroPIE performed significantly better than the undergraduate 
students.
CONCLUSION: MicroPIE is a promising new tool for the rapid and efficient 
extraction of phenotypic character information from prokaryotic taxonomic 
descriptions. However, further development, including incorporation of 
ontologies, will be necessary to improve the performance of the extraction for 
some character types.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-016-1396-8
PMCID: PMC5153691
PMID: 27955641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]