350. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Mar 8;8 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S18. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-8-S1-S18.

SYMBIOmatics: synergies in Medical Informatics and Bioinformatics--exploring 
current scientific literature for emerging topics.

Rebholz-Schuhman D(1), Cameron G, Clark D, van Mulligen E, Coatrieux JL, Del 
Hoyo Barbolla E, Martin-Sanchez F, Milanesi L, Porro I, Beltrame F, Tollis I, 
Van der Lei J.

Author information:
(1)EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, 
Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK. rebholz@ebi.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The SYMBIOmatics Specific Support Action (SSA) is "an information 
gathering and dissemination activity" that seeks "to identify synergies between 
the bioinformatics and the medical informatics" domain to improve collaborative 
progress between both domains (ref. to http://www.symbiomatics.org). As part of 
the project experts in both research fields will be identified and approached 
through a survey. To provide input to the survey, the scientific literature was 
analysed to extract topics relevant to both medical informatics and 
bioinformatics.
RESULTS: This paper presents results of a systematic analysis of the scientific 
literature from medical informatics research and bioinformatics research. In the 
analysis pairs of words (bigrams) from the leading bioinformatics and medical 
informatics journals have been used as indication of existing and emerging 
technologies and topics over the period 2000-2005 ("recent") and 1990-1990 
("past"). We identified emerging topics that were equally important to 
bioinformatics and medical informatics in recent years such as microarray 
experiments, ontologies, open source, text mining and support vector machines. 
Emerging topics that evolved only in bioinformatics were system biology, protein 
interaction networks and statistical methods for microarray analyses, whereas 
emerging topics in medical informatics were grid technology and tissue 
microarrays.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that although both fields have their own specific 
domains of interest, they share common technological developments that tend to 
be initiated by new developments in biotechnology and computer science.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-S1-S18
PMCID: PMC1885847
PMID: 17430562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]