161. J Biomed Inform. 2009 Oct;42(5):967-77. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2009.02.001. Epub 
2009 Feb 14.

Collaborative text-annotation resource for disease-centered relation extraction 
from biomedical text.

Cano C(1), Monaghan T, Blanco A, Wall DP, Peshkin L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, University of 
Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain. ccano@decsai.ugr.es

Agglomerating results from studies of individual biological components has shown 
the potential to produce biomedical discovery and the promise of therapeutic 
development. Such knowledge integration could be tremendously facilitated by 
automated text mining for relation extraction in the biomedical literature. 
Relation extraction systems cannot be developed without substantial datasets 
annotated with ground truth for benchmarking and training. The creation of such 
datasets is hampered by the absence of a resource for launching a distributed 
annotation effort, as well as by the lack of a standardized annotation schema. 
We have developed an annotation schema and an annotation tool which can be 
widely adopted so that the resulting annotated corpora from a multitude of 
disease studies could be assembled into a unified benchmark dataset. The 
contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we provide an overview of 
available benchmark corpora and derive a simple annotation schema for specific 
binary relation extraction problems such as protein-protein and gene-disease 
relation extraction. Second, we present BioNotate: an open source annotation 
resource for the distributed creation of a large corpus. Third, we present and 
make available the results of a pilot annotation effort of the autism disease 
network.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2009.02.001
PMCID: PMC2757509
PMID: 19232400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]