204. JMIR Res Protoc. 2019 Aug 26;8(8):13914. doi: 10.2196/13914.

A Systematic Framework for Analyzing Patient-Generated Narrative Data: Protocol 
for a Content Analysis.

Zolnoori M(1), Balls-Berry JE(1)(2), Brockman TA(3)(4), Patten CA(3)(4), Huang 
M(1), Yao L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United 
States.
(2)College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(3)Community Engagement Program, Center for Clinical and Translational Science, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: Patient narrative data in online health care forums (communities) 
are receiving increasing attention from the scientific community for 
implementing patient-centered care. Natural language processing (NLP) methods 
are gaining more and more attention because of the enormous data volume. 
However, state-of-the-art NLP still cannot meet the need of high-resolution 
analysis of patients' narratives. Manual qualitative analysis still plays a 
pivotal role in answering complicated research questions from analyzing patient 
narratives.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to develop a systematic framework for qualitative 
analysis of patient-generated narratives in online health care forums.
METHODS: Our systematic framework consists of 4 phases: (1) data collection, (2) 
data preparation, (3) content analysis, and (4) interpretation of the results. 
Data collection and data preparation phases are constructed based on text mining 
methods for identifying appropriate online health forums for data collection, 
differentiating posts of patients from other stakeholders, protecting patients' 
privacy, sampling, and choosing the unit of analysis. Content analysis phase is 
built on the framework method, which facilitates and accelerates the 
identification of patterns and themes by an interdisciplinary research team. In 
the end, the focus of interpretation of the results phase is to measure the data 
quality and interpret the findings regarding the dimensions and aspects of 
patients' experiences and concerns in their original contexts.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the usability of the proposed systematic framework 
using 2 case studies: one on determining factors affecting patients' attitudes 
toward antidepressants and another on identifying the disease management 
strategies in patient with diabetes facing financial difficulties. The framework 
provides a clear step-by-step process for systematic content analysis of patient 
narratives and produces high-quality structured results that can be used for 
describing patterns or regularities in patients' experiences, generating and 
testing hypotheses, and identifying areas of improvement in the health care 
systems.
CONCLUSIONS: The systematic framework is a rigorous and standardized method for 
qualitative analysis of patient narratives. Findings obtained through such a 
process indicate authentic dimensions and aspects of patient experiences and 
shed light on patients' concerns, needs, preferences, and values, which are the 
core of patient-centered care.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): RR1-10.2196/13914.

Â©Maryam Zolnoori, Joyce E Balls-Berry, Tabetha A Brockman, Christi A Patten, 
Ming Huang, Lixia Yao. Originally published in JMIR Research Protocols 
(http://www.researchprotocols.org), 26.08.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/13914
PMCID: PMC6786846
PMID: 31452524

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.