612. Health Aff (Millwood). 2016 Feb;35(2):341-7. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1092.

Publicly Available Online Tool Facilitates Real-Time Monitoring Of Vaccine 
Conversations And Sentiments.

Bahk CY(1), Cumming M(2), Paushter L(3), Madoff LC(4), Thomson A(5), Brownstein 
JS(6).

Author information:
(1)Chi Y. Bahk (chi@epidemico.com) is director of Epidemico, in Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Melissa Cumming is an analyst at the International Society for Infectious 
Diseases, in Brookline, Massachusetts.
(3)Louisa Paushter is an analyst at the International Society for Infectious 
Diseases.
(4)Lawrence C. Madoff is an editor at the International Society for Infectious 
Diseases and a professor of medicine at the University of Massachusetts, in 
Worcester.
(5)Angus Thomson is senior director of vaccination policy and advocacy at Sanofi 
Pasteur, in Lyon, France.
(6)John S. Brownstein is cofounder of and a senior executive adviser at 
Epidemico and chief innovation officer at Boston Children's Hospital, in 
Massachusetts.

Real-time monitoring of mainstream and social media can inform public health 
practitioners and policy makers about vaccine sentiment and hesitancy. We 
describe a publicly available platform for monitoring vaccination-related 
content, called the Vaccine Sentimeter. With automated data collection from 
100,000 mainstream media sources and Twitter, natural-language processing for 
automated filtering, and manual curation to ensure accuracy, the Vaccine 
Sentimeter offers a global real-time view of vaccination conversations online. 
To assess the system's utility, we followed two events: polio vaccination in 
Pakistan after a news story about a Central Intelligence Agency vaccination ruse 
and subsequent attacks on health care workers, and a controversial episode in a 
television program about adverse events following human papillomavirus 
vaccination. For both events, increased online activity was detected and 
characterized. For the first event, Twitter response to the attacks on health 
care workers decreased drastically after the first attack, in contrast to 
mainstream media coverage. For the second event, the mainstream and social media 
response was largely positive about the HPV vaccine, but antivaccine 
conversations persisted longer than the provaccine reaction. Using the Vaccine 
Sentimeter could enable public health professionals to detect increased online 
activity or sudden shifts in sentiment that could affect vaccination uptake.

Project HOPEâ€”The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.

DOI: 10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1092
PMID: 26858390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]