150. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Mar 25;658:69-79. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.12.071. 
Epub 2018 Dec 11.

Beyond sound level monitoring: Exploitation of social media to gather citizens 
subjective response to noise.

Gasco L(1), Clavel C(2), Asensio C(3), de Arcas G(3).

Author information:
(1)Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Grupo I2A2, ETS Topografía, Campus Sur 
UPM, Ctra. Valencia km 7, 28031 Madrid, Spain; EIT Digital Doctoral 
School-Madrid CLC, IMDEA Software Institute, Campus Montegancedo s/n, Pozuelo de 
Alarcón, 28223 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: luis.gasco@i2a2.upm.es.
(2)Telecom Paristech, 46 rue Barrault, 75634 Paris Cedex 13, France.
(3)Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Grupo I2A2, ETS Topografía, Campus Sur 
UPM, Ctra. Valencia km 7, 28031 Madrid, Spain.

Subjective response to noise is probably the most important goal in 
environmental acoustics. Traditional surveys have the drawback of high cost 
deriving from its development and execution, the limited number of participants, 
and the duration of the surveying campaign. The main drawbacks of online surveys 
are the low participation, or the self-produced bias that concerns about the 
topic can raise. In both cases, the process of designing questionnaires, 
implementing the survey, and analysing the results can be long, expensive and 
ineffective to monitor changes in the short-term. With the creation of Online 
Social Networks (OSN), people have changed the manner they communicate and use 
technology. Nowadays, people can provide information regarding their likes, 
opinion and discomfort about any topic, including noise, in just a few minutes 
with their smartphone. These Internet opinions can be analysed automatically 
using machine learning and Natural Language Processing techniques to get 
insights that can help in the early detection of noise problems, or in the prior 
assessment of action plans. This information can be significant helpful in 
addressing noise management by local authorities and stakeholders. The purpose 
of this paper is to present a novel methodology, based on machine learning, 
allowing for the gathering and processing of OSN text data, enabling the 
generation of a system able to exploit the data to detect noise complaints and 
to classify them by source. This methodology has been piloted in a case study 
using Twitter, and the main results are presented.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.12.071
PMID: 30572215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]