213. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Jul 25;4(7):e1000029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000029.

Nonnegative matrix factorization: an analytical and interpretive tool in 
computational biology.

Devarajan K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Population Science, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA. karthik.devarajan@fccc.edu

In the last decade, advances in high-throughput technologies such as DNA 
microarrays have made it possible to simultaneously measure the expression 
levels of tens of thousands of genes and proteins. This has resulted in large 
amounts of biological data requiring analysis and interpretation. Nonnegative 
matrix factorization (NMF) was introduced as an unsupervised, parts-based 
learning paradigm involving the decomposition of a nonnegative matrix V into two 
nonnegative matrices, W and H, via a multiplicative updates algorithm. In the 
context of a pxn gene expression matrix V consisting of observations on p genes 
from n samples, each column of W defines a metagene, and each column of H 
represents the metagene expression pattern of the corresponding sample. NMF has 
been primarily applied in an unsupervised setting in image and natural language 
processing. More recently, it has been successfully utilized in a variety of 
applications in computational biology. Examples include molecular pattern 
discovery, class comparison and prediction, cross-platform and cross-species 
analysis, functional characterization of genes and biomedical informatics. In 
this paper, we review this method as a data analytical and interpretive tool in 
computational biology with an emphasis on these applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000029
PMCID: PMC2447881
PMID: 18654623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has declared that no competing 
interests exist.