440. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2020 May 30;2020:710-719. eCollection 2020.

Integrating Electronic Health Record Data into the ADEpedia-on-OHDSI Platform 
for Improved Signal Detection: A Case Study of Immune-related Adverse Events.

Yu Y(1), Ruddy KJ(2), Wen A(1), Zong N(1), Tsuji S(1), Chen J(1), Shah ND(1)(3), 
Jiang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(2)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the Science of Health Care 
Delivery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

With widespread adoption of electronic health records (EHRs), Real World Data 
and Real World Evidence (RWE) have been increasingly used by FDA for evaluating 
drug safety and effectiveness. However, integration of heterogeneous drug safety 
data sources and systems remains an impediment for effective pharmacovigilance 
studies. In an ongoing project, we have developed a next generation 
pharmacovigilance signal detection framework known as ADEpedia-on-OHDSI using 
the OMOP common data model (CDM). The objective of the study is to demonstrate 
the feasibility of the framework for integrating both spontaneous reporting data 
and EHR data for improved signal detection with a case study of immune-related 
adverse events. We first loaded the OMOP CDM with both recent and legacy FAERS 
(FDA Adverse Event Reporting System) data (from the time period between Jan. 
2004 and Dec. 2018). We also integrated the clinical data from the Mayo Clinic 
EHR system for six oncological immunotherapy drugs. We implemented a signal 
detection algorithm and compared the timelines of positive signals detected from 
both FAERS and EHR data. We found that the signals detected from EHRs are 4 
months earlier than signals detected from FAERS database (depending on the 
signal detection methods used) for the ipilimumab-induced hypopituitarism. Our 
CDM-based approach would be useful to provide a scalable solution to integrate 
both drug safety data and EHR data to generate RWE for improved signal 
detection.

Â©2020 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC7233056
PMID: 32477694