140. Comput Biol Med. 2016 May 1;72:263-75. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.01.014. 
Epub 2016 Jan 23.

Unsupervised entity and relation extraction from clinical records in Italian.

Alicante A(1), Corazza A(2), Isgrò F(2), Silvestri S(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e delle Tecnologie dell׳Informazione, 
DIETI, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Via Claudio, 21 - 80125 
Napoli, Italy. Electronic address: anita.alicante@unina.it.
(2)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e delle Tecnologie dell׳Informazione, 
DIETI, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Via Claudio, 21 - 80125 
Napoli, Italy.

This paper proposes and discusses the use of text mining techniques for the 
extraction of information from clinical records written in Italian. However, as 
it is very difficult and expensive to obtain annotated material for languages 
different from English, we only consider unsupervised approaches, where no 
annotated training set is necessary. We therefore propose a complete system that 
is structured in two steps. In the first one domain entities are extracted from 
the clinical records by means of a metathesaurus and standard natural language 
processing tools. The second step attempts to discover relations between the 
entity pairs extracted from the whole set of clinical records. For this last 
step we investigate the performance of unsupervised methods such as clustering 
in the space of entity pairs, represented by an ad hoc feature vector. The 
resulting clusters are then automatically labelled by using the most significant 
features. The system has been tested on a fairly large data set of clinical 
records in Italian, investigating the variation in the performance adopting 
different similarity measures in the feature space. The results of our 
experiments show that the unsupervised approach proposed is promising and well 
suited for a semi-automatic labelling of the extracted relations.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.01.014
PMID: 26851833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]