381. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005;6 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S23. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-6-S1-S23. Epub 2005 May 24.

Data-poor categorization and passage retrieval for gene ontology annotation in 
Swiss-Prot.

Ehrler F(1), Geissb√ºhler A, Jimeno A, Ruch P.

Author information:
(1)Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: In the context of the BioCreative competition, where training data 
were very sparse, we investigated two complementary tasks: 1) given a Swiss-Prot 
triplet, containing a protein, a GO (Gene Ontology) term and a relevant article, 
extraction of a short passage that justifies the GO category assignment; 2) 
given a Swiss-Prot pair, containing a protein and a relevant article, automatic 
assignment of a set of categories.
METHODS: Sentence is the basic retrieval unit. Our classifier computes a 
distance between each sentence and the GO category provided with the Swiss-Prot 
entry. The Text Categorizer computes a distance between each GO term and the 
text of the article. Evaluations are reported both based on annotator judgements 
as established by the competition and based on mean average precision measures 
computed using a curated sample of Swiss-Prot.
RESULTS: Our system achieved the best recall and precision combination both for 
passage retrieval and text categorization as evaluated by official evaluators. 
However, text categorization results were far below those in other data-poor 
text categorization experiments The top proposed term is relevant in less that 
20% of cases, while categorization with other biomedical controlled vocabulary, 
such as the Medical Subject Headings, we achieved more than 90% precision. We 
also observe that the scoring methods used in our experiments, based on the 
retrieval status value of our engines, exhibits effective confidence estimation 
capabilities.
CONCLUSION: From a comparative perspective, the combination of retrieval and 
natural language processing methods we designed, achieved very competitive 
performances. Largely data-independent, our systems were no less effective that 
data-intensive approaches. These results suggests that the overall strategy 
could benefit a large class of information extraction tasks, especially when 
training data are missing. However, from a user perspective, results were 
disappointing. Further investigations are needed to design applicable end-user 
text mining tools for biologists.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-6-S1-S23
PMCID: PMC1869016
PMID: 15960836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]