416. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2010 Jul-Sep;7(3):385-99. doi: 
10.1109/tcbb.2010.61.

An Overview of BioCreative II.5.

Leitner F(1), Mardis SA, Krallinger M, Cesareni G, Hirschman LA, Valencia A.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology and BioComputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer 
Research Centre, Madrid, Spain. valencia@cnio.es

We present the results of the BioCreative II.5 evaluation in association with 
the FEBS Letters experiment, where authors created Structured Digital Abstracts 
to capture information about protein-protein interactions. The BioCreative II.5 
challenge evaluated automatic annotations from 15 text mining teams based on a 
gold standard created by reconciling annotations from curators, authors, and 
automated systems. The tasks were to rank articles for curation based on 
curatable protein-protein interactions; to identify the interacting proteins 
(using UniProt identifiers) in the positive articles (61); and to identify 
interacting protein pairs. There were 595 full-text articles in the evaluation 
test set, including those both with and without curatable protein interactions. 
The principal evaluation metrics were the interpolated area under the 
precision/recall curve (AUC iP/R), and (balanced) F-measure. For article 
classification, the best AUC iP/R was 0.70; for interacting proteins, the best 
system achieved good macroaveraged recall (0.73) and interpolated area under the 
precision/recall curve (0.58), after filtering incorrect species and mapping 
homonymous orthologs; for interacting protein pairs, the top (filtered, mapped) 
recall was 0.42 and AUC iP/R was 0.29. Ensemble systems improved performance for 
the interacting protein task.

DOI: 10.1109/tcbb.2010.61
PMID: 20704011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]