130. Database (Oxford). 2012 Apr 18;2012:bas020. doi: 10.1093/database/bas020. Print 
2012.

Text mining for the biocuration workflow.

Hirschman L(1), Burns GA, Krallinger M, Arighi C, Cohen KB, Valencia A, Wu CH, 
Chatr-Aryamontri A, Dowell KG, Huala E, Louren√ßo A, Nash R, Veuthey AL, Wiegers 
T, Winter AG.

Author information:
(1)The MITRE Corporation, 202 Burlington Road, Bedford, MA 01730, USA. 
lynette@mitre.org

Molecular biology has become heavily dependent on biological knowledge encoded 
in expert curated biological databases. As the volume of biological literature 
increases, biocurators need help in keeping up with the literature; (semi-) 
automated aids for biocuration would seem to be an ideal application for natural 
language processing and text mining. However, to date, there have been few 
documented successes for improving biocuration throughput using text mining. Our 
initial investigations took place for the workshop on 'Text Mining for the 
BioCuration Workflow' at the third International Biocuration Conference (Berlin, 
2009). We interviewed biocurators to obtain workflows from eight biological 
databases. This initial study revealed high-level commonalities, including (i) 
selection of documents for curation; (ii) indexing of documents with 
biologically relevant entities (e.g. genes); and (iii) detailed curation of 
specific relations (e.g. interactions); however, the detailed workflows also 
showed many variabilities. Following the workshop, we conducted a survey of 
biocurators. The survey identified biocurator priorities, including the handling 
of full text indexed with biological entities and support for the identification 
and prioritization of documents for curation. It also indicated that two-thirds 
of the biocuration teams had experimented with text mining and almost half were 
using text mining at that time. Analysis of our interviews and survey provide a 
set of requirements for the integration of text mining into the biocuration 
workflow. These can guide the identification of common needs across curated 
databases and encourage joint experimentation involving biocurators, text mining 
developers and the larger biomedical research community.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bas020
PMCID: PMC3328793
PMID: 22513129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]