332. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2015 Aug;2015:1401-4. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318631.

Electronic Health Record Application Support Service Enablers.

Neofytou MS, Neokleous K, Aristodemou A, Constantinou I, Antoniou Z, Schiza EC, 
Pattichis CS, Schizas CN.

There is a huge need for open source software solutions in the healthcare 
domain, given the flexibility, interoperability and resource savings 
characteristics they offer. In this context, this paper presents the development 
of three open source libraries - Specific Enablers (SEs) for eHealth 
applications that were developed under the European project titled "Future 
Internet Social and Technological Alignment Research" (FI-STAR) funded under the 
"Future Internet Public Private Partnership" (FI-PPP) program. The three SEs 
developed under the Electronic Health Record Application Support Service 
Enablers (EHR-EN) correspond to: a) an Electronic Health Record enabler (EHR 
SE), b) a patient summary enabler based on the EU project "European patient 
Summary Open Source services" (epSOS SE) supporting patient mobility and the 
offering of interoperable services, and c) a Picture Archiving and 
Communications System (PACS) enabler (PACS SE) based on the dcm4che open source 
system for the support of medical imaging functionality. The EHR SE follows the 
HL7 Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) V2.0 and supports the Integrating the 
Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) profiles (recently awarded in Connectathon 2015). 
These three FI-STAR platform enablers are designed to facilitate the deployment 
of innovative applications and value added services in the health care sector. 
They can be downloaded from the FI-STAR cataloque website. Work in progress 
focuses in the validation and evaluation scenarios for the proving and 
demonstration of the usability, applicability and adaptability of the proposed 
enablers.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318631
PMID: 26736531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]