296. J Digit Imaging. 2014 Dec;27(6):730-6. doi: 10.1007/s10278-014-9708-x.

Automated classification of radiology reports to facilitate retrospective study 
in radiology.

Zhou Y(1), Amundson PK, Yu F, Kessler MM, Benzinger TL, Wippold FJ.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Radiology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 3635 
Vista Blvd at Grand Blvd, Saint Louis, MO, 63110, USA, yzhou31@slu.edu.

Retrospective research is an import tool in radiology. Identifying imaging 
examinations appropriate for a given research question from the unstructured 
radiology reports is extremely useful, but labor-intensive. Using the machine 
learning text-mining methods implemented in LingPipe [1], we evaluated the 
performance of the dynamic language model (DLM) and the Na√Øve Bayesian (NB) 
classifiers in classifying radiology reports to facilitate identification of 
radiological examinations for research projects. The training dataset consisted 
of 14,325 sentences from 11,432 radiology reports randomly selected from a 
database of 5,104,594 reports in all disciplines of radiology. The training 
sentences were categorized manually into six categories (Positive, Differential, 
Post Treatment, Negative, Normal, and History). A 10-fold cross-validation [2] 
was used to evaluate the performance of the models, which were tested in 
classification of radiology reports for cases of sellar or suprasellar masses 
and colloid cysts. The average accuracies for the DLM and NB classifiers were 
88.5% with 95% confidence interval (CI) of 1.9% and 85.9% with 95% CI of 2.0%, 
respectively. The DLM performed slightly better and was used to classify 1,397 
radiology reports containing the keywords "sellar or suprasellar mass", or 
"colloid cyst". The DLM model produced an accuracy of 88.2% with 95% CI of 2.1% 
for 959 reports that contain "sellar or suprasellar mass" and an accuracy of 
86.3% with 95% CI of 2.5% for 437 reports of "colloid cyst". We conclude that 
automated classification of radiology reports using machine learning techniques 
can effectively facilitate the identification of cases suitable for 
retrospective research.

DOI: 10.1007/s10278-014-9708-x
PMCID: PMC4391070
PMID: 24874407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]