394. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Dec 3;10 Suppl 15(Suppl 15):S7. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-10-S15-S7.

BIOADI: a machine learning approach to identifying abbreviations and definitions 
in biological literature.

Kuo CJ(1), Ling MH, Lin KT, Hsu CN.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan, 
Republic of China. clarkkuo@iis.sinica.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: To automatically process large quantities of biological literature 
for knowledge discovery and information curation, text mining tools are becoming 
essential. Abbreviation recognition is related to NER and can be considered as a 
pair recognition task of a terminology and its corresponding abbreviation from 
free text. The successful identification of abbreviation and its corresponding 
definition is not only a prerequisite to index terms of text databases to 
produce articles of related interests, but also a building block to improve 
existing gene mention tagging and gene normalization tools.
RESULTS: Our approach to abbreviation recognition (AR) is based on 
machine-learning, which exploits a novel set of rich features to learn rules 
from training data. Tested on the AB3P corpus, our system demonstrated a F-score 
of 89.90% with 95.86% precision at 84.64% recall, higher than the result 
achieved by the existing best AR performance system. We also annotated a new 
corpus of 1200 PubMed abstracts which was derived from BioCreative II gene 
normalization corpus. On our annotated corpus, our system achieved a F-score of 
86.20% with 93.52% precision at 79.95% recall, which also outperforms all tested 
systems.
CONCLUSION: By applying our system to extract all short form-long form pairs 
from all available PubMed abstracts, we have constructed BIOADI. Mining BIOADI 
reveals many interesting trends of bio-medical research. Besides, we also 
provide an off-line AR software in the download section on 
http://bioagent.iis.sinica.edu.tw/BIOADI/.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S15-S7
PMCID: PMC2788358
PMID: 19958517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]