543. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2015 Nov 5;2015:406-15. eCollection 2015.

Cloud-based Predictive Modeling System and its Application to Asthma Readmission 
Prediction.

Chen R(1), Su H(1), Khalilia M(1), Lin S(1), Peng Y(1), Davis T(2), Hirsh DA(3), 
Searles E(2), Tejedor-Sojo J(2), Thompson M(2), Sun J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Pediatric Emergency Medicine Associates, LLC, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The predictive modeling process is time consuming and requires clinical 
researchers to handle complex electronic health record (EHR) data in restricted 
computational environments. To address this problem, we implemented a 
cloud-based predictive modeling system via a hybrid setup combining a secure 
private server with the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic MapReduce platform. 
EHR data is preprocessed on a private server and the resulting de-identified 
event sequences are hosted on AWS. Based on user-specified modeling 
configurations, an on-demand web service launches a cluster of Elastic Compute 2 
(EC2) instances on AWS to perform feature selection and classification 
algorithms in a distributed fashion. Afterwards, the secure private server 
aggregates results and displays them via interactive visualization. We tested 
the system on a pediatric asthma readmission task on a de-identified EHR dataset 
of 2,967 patients. We conduct a larger scale experiment on the CMS Linkable 
2008-2010 Medicare Data Entrepreneurs' Synthetic Public Use File dataset of 2 
million patients, which achieves over 25-fold speedup compared to sequential 
execution.

PMCID: PMC4765612
PMID: 26958172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]