613. Trials. 2018 May 16;19(1):278. doi: 10.1186/s13063-018-2658-8.

Pragmatic randomised clinical trials using electronic health records: general 
practitioner views on a model of a priori consent.

Hills T(1), Semprini A(2), Beasley R(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Private Bag 7902, Wellington, 
6242, New Zealand. tom.hills@mrinz.ac.nz.
(2)Medical Research Institute of New Zealand, Private Bag 7902, Wellington, 
6242, New Zealand.

Pragmatic randomised clinical trials could use existing electronic health 
records (EHRs) to identify trial participants, perform randomisation, and to 
collect follow-up data. Achieving adequate informed consent in routine care and 
clinician recruitment have been identified as key barriers to this approach to 
clinical trials. We propose a model where written informed consent for a 
pragmatic comparative effectiveness trial is obtained in advance by the research 
team, recorded in the EHR, and then confirmed by the general practitioner (GP) 
at the time of enrolment. The EHR software then randomly assigns a patient to 
one of two treatments. Follow-up data is collected in the EHR. Twenty-two of 23 
GPs surveyed (96%) were 'definitely' or 'probably' comfortable with confirming 
consent. Twenty-one out of 23 GPs (91%) were 'definitely' or 'probably' 
comfortable with a patient being randomised to one of two comparable drugs 
during a routine consultation. Twenty-two out of 23 GPs (96%) were 'definitely' 
or 'probably' comfortable with allowing the electronic system to randomise a 
patient to drug A or drug B and generate a prescription. Ten out of 23 GPs (43%) 
identified time constraints as the main hurdle to conducting this sort of 
research in the primary care setting. On average, it was felt that 6.5 min, in 
addition to a usual consult, would be acceptable to complete enrolment. Our 
survey found this model of a comparative effectiveness trial to be acceptable to 
the majority of GPs.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-018-2658-8
PMCID: PMC5956547
PMID: 29769088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
project was approved by Victoria University of Wellington Ethics Committee (ref: 
22859). Respondents gave informed consent to participate in the study. CONSENT 
FOR PUBLICATION: GPs agreed to participate in the survey on the understanding 
that their data would not be published in any identifiable form. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors are working to establish a platform for conducting 
pragmatic RCTs in primary care. The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.