321. J Biomed Inform. 2012 Aug;45(4):763-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2012.01.009. Epub 
2012 Feb 4.

Building a robust, scalable and standards-driven infrastructure for secondary 
use of EHR data: the SHARPn project.

Rea S(1), Pathak J, Savova G, Oniki TA, Westberg L, Beebe CE, Tao C, Parker CG, 
Haug PJ, Huff SM, Chute CG.

Author information:
(1)Homer Warner Center for Informatics Research, Intermountain Healthcare, 
Murray, UT 84107, USA. Susan.Rea@imail.org

The Strategic Health IT Advanced Research Projects (SHARP) Program, established 
by the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology in 
2010 supports research findings that remove barriers for increased adoption of 
health IT. The improvements envisioned by the SHARP Area 4 Consortium (SHARPn) 
will enable the use of the electronic health record (EHR) for secondary 
purposes, such as care process and outcomes improvement, biomedical research and 
epidemiologic monitoring of the nation's health. One of the primary informatics 
problem areas in this endeavor is the standardization of disparate health data 
from the nation's many health care organizations and providers. The SHARPn team 
is developing open source services and components to support the ubiquitous 
exchange, sharing and reuse or 'liquidity' of operational clinical data stored 
in electronic health records. One year into the design and development of the 
SHARPn framework, we demonstrated end to end data flow and a prototype SHARPn 
platform, using thousands of patient electronic records sourced from two large 
healthcare organizations: Mayo Clinic and Intermountain Healthcare. The platform 
was deployed to (1) receive source EHR data in several formats, (2) generate 
structured data from EHR narrative text, and (3) normalize the EHR data using 
common detailed clinical models and Consolidated Health Informatics standard 
terminologies, which were (4) accessed by a phenotyping service using normalized 
data specifications. The architecture of this prototype SHARPn platform is 
presented. The EHR data throughput demonstration showed success in normalizing 
native EHR data, both structured and narrative, from two independent 
organizations and EHR systems. Based on the demonstration, observed challenges 
for standardization of EHR data for interoperable secondary use are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2012.01.009
PMCID: PMC4905766
PMID: 22326800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]