449. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2015 Sep;22(5):987-92. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocv002. Epub 
2015 May 13.

Exploring relation types for literature-based discovery.

Preiss J(1), Stevenson M(2), Gaizauskas R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, The University of Sheffield 211 Portobello, 
Sheffield S1 4DP, UK j.preiss@sheffield.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Computer Science, The University of Sheffield 211 Portobello, 
Sheffield S1 4DP, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Literature-based discovery (LBD) aims to identify "hidden knowledge" 
in the medical literature by: (1) analyzing documents to identify pairs of 
explicitly related concepts (terms), then (2) hypothesizing novel relations 
between pairs of unrelated concepts that are implicitly related via a shared 
concept to which both are explicitly related. Many LBD approaches use simple 
techniques to identify semantically weak relations between concepts, for 
example, document co-occurrence. These generate huge numbers of hypotheses, 
difficult for humans to assess. More complex techniques rely on linguistic 
analysis, for example, shallow parsing, to identify semantically stronger 
relations. Such approaches generate fewer hypotheses, but may miss hidden 
knowledge. The authors investigate this trade-off in detail, comparing 
techniques for identifying related concepts to discover which are most suitable 
for LBD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A generic LBD system that can utilize a range of relation 
types was developed. Experiments were carried out comparing a number of 
techniques for identifying relations. Two approaches were used for evaluation: 
replication of existing discoveries and the "time slicing" approach.(1) RESULTS: 
Previous LBD discoveries could be replicated using relations based either on 
document co-occurrence or linguistic analysis. Using relations based on 
linguistic analysis generated many fewer hypotheses, but a significantly greater 
proportion of them were candidates for hidden knowledge.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: The use of linguistic analysis-based relations 
improves accuracy of LBD without overly damaging coverage. LBD systems often 
generate huge numbers of hypotheses, which are infeasible to manually review. 
Improving their accuracy has the potential to make these systems significantly 
more usable.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocv002
PMCID: PMC4986660
PMID: 25971437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]