587. Methods Inf Med. 2010;49(2):186-95. doi: 10.3414/ME09-02-0018. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Semantic interoperability in Czech healthcare environment supported by HL7 
version 3.

Nagy M(1), Hanzlícek P, Precková P, Ríha A, Dioszegi M, Seidl L, Zvárová J.

Author information:
(1)Center of Biomedical Informatics, ICS AS CR, v.v.i., Pod Vodarenskou vezi 2, 
182 07 Prague, Czech Republic. nagy@euromise.cz

OBJECTIVES: The data interchange in the Czech healthcare environment is mostly 
based on national standards. This paper describes a utilization of international 
standards and nomenclatures for building a pilot semantic interoperability 
platform (SIP) that would serve to exchange information among electronic health 
record systems (EHR-Ss) in Czech healthcare. The work was performed by the 
national research project of the "Information Society" program.
METHODS: At the beginning of the project a set of requirements the SIP should 
meet was formulated. Several communication standards (openEHR, HL7 v3, DICOM) 
were analyzed and HL7 v3 was selected to exchange health records in our 
solution. Two systems were included in our pilot environment: WinMedicalc 2000 
and ADAMEKj EHR.
RESULTS: HL7-based local information models were created to describe the 
information content of both systems. The concepts from our original information 
models were mapped to coding systems supported by HL7 (LOINC, SNOMED CT and 
ICD-10) and the data exchange via HL7 v3 messages was implemented and tested by 
querying patient administration data. As a gateway between local EHR systems and 
the HL7 message-based infrastructure, a configurable HL7 Broker was developed.
CONCLUSIONS: A nationwide implementation of a full-scale SIP based on HL7 v3 
would include adopting and translating appropriate international coding systems 
and nomenclatures, and developing implementation guidelines facilitating the 
migration from national standards to international ones. Our pilot study showed 
that our approach is feasible but it would demand a huge effort to fully 
integrate the Czech healthcare system into the European e-health context.

DOI: 10.3414/ME09-02-0018
PMID: 19936441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]