534. Hum Mutat. 2008 Mar;29(3):333-44. doi: 10.1002/humu.20629.

CoagMDB: a database analysis of missense mutations within four conserved domains 
in five vitamin K-dependent coagulation serine proteases using a text-mining 
tool.

Saunders RE(1), Perkins SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Central repositories of mutations that combine structural, sequence, and 
phenotypic information in related proteins will facilitate the diagnosis and 
molecular understanding of diseases associated with them. Coagulation involves 
the sequential activation of serine proteases and regulators in order to yield 
stable blood clots while maintaining hemostasis. Five coagulation serine 
proteases-factor VII (F7), factor IX (F9), factor X (F10), protein C (PROC), and 
thrombin (F2)-exhibit high sequence similarities and all require vitamin K. All 
five of these were incorporated into an interactive database of mutations named 
CoagMDB (http://www.coagMDB.org; last accessed: 9 August 2007). The large number 
of mutations involved (especially for factor IX) and the increasing problem of 
out-of-date databases required the development of new database management tools. 
A text mining tool automatically scans full-length references to identify and 
extract mutations. High recall rates between 96 and 99% and precision rates of 
87 to 93% were achieved. Text mining significantly reduces the time and 
expertise required to maintain the databases and offers a solution to the 
problem of locus-specific database management and upkeep. A total of 875 
mutations were extracted from 1,279 literature sources. Of these, 116 correspond 
to Gla domains, 86 to the N-terminal EGF domain, 73 to the C-terminal EGF 
domain, and 477 to the serine protease domain. The combination of text mining 
and consensus domain structures enables mutations to be correlated with 
experimentally-measurable phenotypes based on either low protein levels (Type I) 
or reduced functional activities (Type II), respectively. A tendency for the 
conservation of phenotype with structural location was identified.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20629
PMID: 18058827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]