147. J Biomed Inform. 2016 Apr;60:309-18. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.02.015. Epub 2016 
Feb 27.

A categorical analysis of coreference resolution errors in biomedical texts.

Choi M(1), Zobel J(2), Verspoor K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia; National ICT Australia (NICTA), Victoria Research 
Laboratory, Australia. Electronic address: jooc1@student.unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: jzobel@unimelb.edu.au.
(3)Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: karin.verspoor@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Coreference resolution is an essential task in information 
extraction from the published biomedical literature. It supports the discovery 
of complex information by linking referring expressions such as pronouns and 
appositives to their referents, which are typically entities that play a central 
role in biomedical events. Correctly establishing these links allows detailed 
understanding of all the participants in events, and connecting events together 
through their shared participants.
RESULTS: As an initial step towards the development of a novel coreference 
resolution system for the biomedical domain, we have categorised the 
characteristics of coreference relations by type of anaphor as well as broader 
syntactic and semantic characteristics, and have compared the performance of a 
domain adaptation of a state-of-the-art general system to published results from 
domain-specific systems in terms of this categorisation. We also develop a 
rule-based system for anaphoric coreference resolution in the biomedical domain 
with simple modules derived from available systems. Our results show that the 
domain-specific systems outperform the general system overall. Whilst this 
result is unsurprising, our proposed categorisation enables a detailed 
quantitative analysis of the system performance. We identify limitations of each 
system and find that there remain important gaps in the state-of-the-art 
systems, which are clearly identifiable with respect to the categorisation.
CONCLUSION: We have analysed in detail the performance of existing coreference 
resolution systems for the biomedical literature and have demonstrated that 
there clear gaps in their coverage. The approach developed in the general domain 
needs to be tailored for portability to the biomedical domain. The specific 
framework for class-based error analysis of existing systems that we propose has 
benefits for identifying specific limitations of those systems. This in turn 
provides insights for further system development.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.02.015
PMID: 26925515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]