524. Bioinformatics. 2008 Jul 1;24(13):i277-85. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn182.

Identifying gene-disease associations using centrality on a literature mined 
gene-interaction network.

Ozg√ºr A(1), Vu T, Erkan G, Radev DR.

Author information:
(1)Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and School of Information, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

MOTIVATION: Understanding the role of genetics in diseases is one of the most 
important aims of the biological sciences. The completion of the Human Genome 
Project has led to a rapid increase in the number of publications in this area. 
However, the coverage of curated databases that provide information manually 
extracted from the literature is limited. Another challenge is that determining 
disease-related genes requires laborious experiments. Therefore, predicting good 
candidate genes before experimental analysis will save time and effort. We 
introduce an automatic approach based on text mining and network analysis to 
predict gene-disease associations. We collected an initial set of known 
disease-related genes and built an interaction network by automatic literature 
mining based on dependency parsing and support vector machines. Our hypothesis 
is that the central genes in this disease-specific network are likely to be 
related to the disease. We used the degree, eigenvector, betweenness and 
closeness centrality metrics to rank the genes in the network.
RESULTS: The proposed approach can be used to extract known and to infer unknown 
gene-disease associations. We evaluated the approach for prostate cancer. 
Eigenvector and degree centrality achieved high accuracy. A total of 95% of the 
top 20 genes ranked by these methods are confirmed to be related to prostate 
cancer. On the other hand, betweenness and closeness centrality predicted more 
genes whose relation to the disease is currently unknown and are candidates for 
experimental study.
AVAILABILITY: A web-based system for browsing the disease-specific 
gene-interaction networks is available at: http://gin.ncibi.org.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn182
PMCID: PMC2718658
PMID: 18586725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]