5. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2018 Nov 11;6(6):e00435. doi: 10.1002/prp2.435. 
eCollection 2018 Dec.

Natural language processing-based assessment of consistency in summaries of 
product characteristics of generic antimicrobials.

Shimazawa R(1), Kano Y(2), Ikeda M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology Tokai University School of Medicine 
Isehara Japan.
(2)Faculty of Informatics Shizuoka University Hamamatsu Shizuoka Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Informatics Kagawa University Hospital Kagawa Japan.

To investigate consistency in summaries of product characteristics (SmPCs) of 
generic antimicrobials, we used natural language processing (NLP) to analyze and 
compare large amounts of text quantifying consistency between original and 
generic SmPCs. We manually compared each section of generic and original SmPCs 
for antimicrobials listed in the electronic Medicines Compendium in the United 
Kingdom, focusing on omissions and additions of clinically significant 
information (CSI). Independently, we quantified differences between the original 
and generic SmPCs using Kachako, a fully automatic NLP platform. Among the 137 
antimicrobials listed in the electronic Medicines Compendium, we identified 193 
pairs of original and generic antimicrobial SmPCs for the 48 antimicrobials for 
which generic SmPCs existed. Of these 193 pairs, 157 (81%) were consistent and 
36 were inconsistent with the original SmPC. When the cut-off value of RATE (the 
index of similarity between two SmPCs) was set at 0.860, our NLP system 
effectively discriminated consistent generic SmPCs with a specificity of 100% 
and a sensitivity of 61%. We observed CSI omissions but not additions in the 
SmPC subsection related to pharmacokinetic properties. CSI additions but not 
omissions were found in the subsections dealing with therapeutic indications and 
fertility, pregnancy and lactation. Despite regulatory guidance, we observed 
substantial inconsistencies in the information in the United Kingdom SmPCs for 
antimicrobials. NLP technology proved to be a useful tool for checking large 
numbers of SmPCs for consistency.

DOI: 10.1002/prp2.435
PMCID: PMC6230812
PMID: 30455958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]