530. JAMIA Open. 2019 Dec 16;3(1):37-43. doi: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz048. eCollection 
2020 Apr.

Using a custom mobile application for change management in an electronic health 
record implementation.

Threatt T(1), Pirtle CJ(2), Dzwonkowski J(1), Johnson KB(2).

Author information:
(1)HealthIT, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Institutions cite managing the modification in infrastructure, 
technical support, and process change as substantial barriers to a successful 
electronic health record (EHR) implementation. In an effort to organize and 
centralize the complex scheduling, task completion and communication needs of a 
"big-bang" EHR go-live, we developed a unified communication system with the 
goal of improving implementation process efficiency. Our goal was to create a 
platform that would work across the medical enterprise.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We employed an agile process to design the application, 
called Hubbl, based on initial requirements and iteratively obtained stakeholder 
user. The final feature set included role-specific organization, integrated 
communication, task and content management tooling, and embedded project 
information retrieval, all embedded into the end user's day to day activities.
RESULTS: User enrollment continually increased from launch in February of 2017 
through go-live day. During the pre-go-live period, usage increased from an 
average of 7.37 events/user/day to 18.65 events/user/day with over 97 
communications sent across all periods. 5400 unique users accessed tip sheets 
and information retrieval tools averaged 28.84 searches/user/day during the 
go-live period with an average high of 46.33 searches/user/day 5 days 
post-go-live. User access during go-live and post-go-live averaged 12.82 
accesses/user/day and decreased from 20.42 average accesses on day one of go 
live to 14.07 averaged accesses on day 60 of post-go-live with over 727 tasks 
monitored to completion during all periods.
CONCLUSION: Hubbl was an essential component of our communication, task 
coordination, and change management strategy, for our EHR go live. Institutions 
that choose a unified mobile and web-based platform during a substantial IT 
(information technology) implementation can feasibly ensure task completion, 
project coordination, and timely information dissemination.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz048
PMCID: PMC7309254
PMID: 32607486