77. Database (Oxford). 2019 Jan 1;2019:baz051. doi: 10.1093/database/baz051.

GIDB: a knowledge database for the automated curation and multidimensional 
analysis of molecular signatures in gastrointestinal cancer.

Wang Y(1)(2), Wang Y(1), Wang S(1), Tong Y(1), Jin L(1), Zong H(1), Zheng R(1), 
Yang J(1), Zhang Z(1), Ouyang E(1), Zhou M(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Translational Medicine, Shanghai East Hospital, School of 
Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery 
Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Gastrointestinal (GI) cancer is common, characterized by high mortality, and 
includes oesophagus, gastric, liver, bile duct, pancreas, rectal and colon 
cancers. The insufficient specificity and sensitivity of biomarkers is still a 
key clinical hindrance for GI cancer diagnosis and successful treatment. The 
emergence of `precision medicine', `basket trial' and `field cancerization' 
concepts calls for an urgent need and importance for the understanding of how 
organ system cancers occur at the molecular levels. Knowledge from both the 
literature and data available in public databases is informative in elucidating 
the molecular alterations underlying GI cancer. Currently, most available cancer 
databases have not offered a comprehensive discovery of gene-disease 
associations, molecular alterations and clinical information by integrated text 
mining and data mining in GI cancer. We develop GIDB, a panoptic knowledge 
database that attempts to automate the curation of molecular signatures using 
natural language processing approaches and multidimensional analyses. GIDB 
covers information on 8730 genes with both literature and data supporting 
evidence, 248 miRNAs, 58 lncRNAs, 320 copy number variations, 49 fusion genes 
and 2381 semantic networks. It presents a comprehensive database, not only in 
parallelizing supporting evidence and data integration for signatures associated 
with GI cancer but also in providing the timeline feature of major molecular 
discoveries. It highlights the most comprehensive overview, research hotspots 
and the development of historical knowledge of genes in GI cancer. Furthermore, 
GIDB characterizes genomic abnormalities in multilevel analysis, including 
simple somatic mutations, gene expression, DNA methylation and prognosis. GIDB 
offers a user-friendly interface and two customizable online tools (Heatmap and 
Network) for experimental researchers and clinicians to explore data and help 
them shorten the learning curve and broaden the scope of knowledge. More 
importantly, GIDB is an ongoing research project that will continue to be 
updated and improve the automated method for reducing manual work.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baz051
PMCID: PMC6517830
PMID: 31089686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]