338. J Biomed Inform. 2017 Aug;72:120-131. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.07.001. Epub 2017 
Jul 4.

Leveraging syntax to better capture the semantics of elliptical coordinated 
compound noun phrases.

Blake C(1), Rindflesch T(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 
USA; National Library of Medicine, NIH, Bethesda, USA. Electronic address: 
clblake@illinois.edu.
(2)National Library of Medicine, NIH, Bethesda, USA.

Full-text scientific articles are increasingly available, but capturing the 
meaning conveyed within an article automatically remains a bottleneck for 
semantic search and reasoning systems. In this paper we consider elliptical 
coordinated compound noun phrases that authors use to save space in an article. 
Systems that do not attend to coordination would incorrectly interpret "breast 
or lung cancer" as a body part (breast) and a disease (lung cancer) rather than 
two diseases. The algorithmic approach introduced in this paper uses a 
generate-and-test strategy where candidate expansions for forward, backward and 
complex ellipses are generated from syntactic dependencies. Dependencies are 
also used to create a dictionary of non-coordinated noun phrases that is used 
during the test phrase. Experiments on 21,280 full-text articles show that more 
than a million noun phrases were impacted by coordinated ellipses. The system 
achieves 73.07% precision, 75.38% recall, 74.23% F-score and 94.72% accuracy for 
new noun phrases in the development set. The precision was higher for backward 
(82.62 vs. 78.63) and forward expansions (64.82 vs. 60.17) and lower for complex 
expansions (63.41 vs. 72.59) in a test set. On average 10.79% of all noun 
phrases would be missed if coordination were not resolved, which corresponds to 
48 new noun phrases per article in the journal Carcinogenesis, 52 new phrases 
per article in Diabetes, and 56 new phrases per article in Endocrinology. 
Results also show coordinated ellipses are more prevalent in abstracts (12.31% 
of all noun phrases) than in the body of an article (10.70%). To further test 
the generalizability of this approach the system (without modification) was used 
on two new collections.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.07.001
PMID: 28687199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]