49. On Move Meaningful Internet Syst. 2016 Oct;10033:699-708. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-48472-3_43. Epub 2016 Oct 18.

An Ontology-Enabled Natural Language Processing Pipeline for Provenance Metadata 
Extraction from Biomedical Text (Short Paper).

Valdez J(1), Rueschman M(2), Kim M(2), Redline S(2), Sahoo SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Informatics and Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science Department, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.

Extraction of structured information from biomedical literature is a complex and 
challenging problem due to the complexity of biomedical domain and lack of 
appropriate natural language processing (NLP) techniques. High quality domain 
ontologies model both data and metadata information at a fine level of 
granularity, which can be effectively used to accurately extract structured 
information from biomedical text. Extraction of provenance metadata, which 
describes the history or source of information, from published articles is an 
important task to support scientific reproducibility. Reproducibility of results 
reported by previous research studies is a foundational component of scientific 
advancement. This is highlighted by the recent initiative by the US National 
Institutes of Health called "Principles of Rigor and Reproducibility". In this 
paper, we describe an effective approach to extract provenance metadata from 
published biomedical research literature using an ontology-enabled NLP platform 
as part of the Provenance for Clinical and Healthcare Research (ProvCaRe). The 
ProvCaRe-NLP tool extends the clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction 
System (cTAKES) platform using both provenance and biomedical domain ontologies. 
We demonstrate the effectiveness of ProvCaRe-NLP tool using a corpus of 20 
peer-reviewed publications. The results of our evaluation demonstrate that the 
ProvCaRe-NLP tool has significantly higher recall in extracting provenance 
metadata as compared to existing NLP pipelines such as MetaMap.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-48472-3_43
PMCID: PMC5486409
PMID: 28664200