109. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2018 Jul 6;18(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s12911-018-0645-3.

Using data-driven sublanguage pattern mining to induce knowledge models: 
application in medical image reports knowledge representation.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Fesharaki NJ(1), Liu H(2), Luo J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Informatics and Administration, Center for Biomedical 
Data and Language Processing, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2025 E Newport 
Ave, NWQ-B Room 6469, Milwaukee, WI, 53211, USA.
(2)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
205 3rd Ave SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(3)Department of Health Informatics and Administration, Center for Biomedical 
Data and Language Processing, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2025 E Newport 
Ave, NWQ-B Room 6469, Milwaukee, WI, 53211, USA. jakeluo@uwm.edu.

BACKGROUND: The use of knowledge models facilitates information retrieval, 
knowledge base development, and therefore supports new knowledge discovery that 
ultimately enables decision support applications. Most existing works have 
employed machine learning techniques to construct a knowledge base. However, 
they often suffer from low precision in extracting entity and relationships. In 
this paper, we described a data-driven sublanguage pattern mining method that 
can be used to create a knowledge model. We combined natural language processing 
(NLP) and semantic network analysis in our model generation pipeline.
METHODS: As a use case of our pipeline, we utilized data from an open source 
imaging case repository, Radiopaedia.org , to generate a knowledge model that 
represents the contents of medical imaging reports. We extracted entities and 
relationships using the Stanford part-of-speech parser and the 
"Subject:Relationship:Object" syntactic data schema. The identified noun phrases 
were tagged with the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) semantic types. An 
evaluation was done on a dataset comprised of 83 image notes from four data 
sources.
RESULTS: A semantic type network was built based on the co-occurrence of 135 
UMLS semantic types in 23,410 medical image reports. By regrouping the semantic 
types and generalizing the semantic network, we created a knowledge model that 
contains 14 semantic categories. Our knowledge model was able to cover 98% of 
the content in the evaluation corpus and revealed 97% of the relationships. 
Machine annotation achieved a precision of 87%, recall of 79%, and F-score of 
82%.
CONCLUSION: The results indicated that our pipeline was able to produce a 
comprehensive content-based knowledge model that could represent context from 
various sources in the same domain.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-018-0645-3
PMCID: PMC6035419
PMID: 29980203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
author(s) declare(s) that this study does not involve human subjects or personal 
identifiable information. So this study does not need ethics approval or consent 
from individuals. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: The author(s) declare(s) that the 
manuscript does not contain any individual person’s data. So this paper requires 
no consent to publish. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have 
no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.