141. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019 Feb 8;20(1):70. doi: 10.1186/s12859-019-2634-7.

Analyzing a co-occurrence gene-interaction network to identify disease-gene 
association.

Al-Aamri A(1), Taha K(1), Al-Hammadi Y(1), Maalouf M(2), Homouz D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates.
(2)Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates.
(3)Department of Physics, Khalifa University of Science and Technology, Abu 
Dhabi, P.O. Box 127788,, United Arab Emirates. dirar.homouz@ku.ac.ae.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the genetic networks and their role in chronic 
diseases (e.g., cancer) is one of the important objectives of biological 
researchers. In this work, we present a text mining system that constructs a 
gene-gene-interaction network for the entire human genome and then performs 
network analysis to identify disease-related genes. We recognize the interacting 
genes based on their co-occurrence frequency within the biomedical literature 
and by employing linear and non-linear rare-event classification models. We 
analyze the constructed network of genes by using different network centrality 
measures to decide on the importance of each gene. Specifically, we apply 
betweenness, closeness, eigenvector, and degree centrality metrics to rank the 
central genes of the network and to identify possible cancer-related genes.
RESULTS: We evaluated the top 15 ranked genes for different cancer types (i.e., 
Prostate, Breast, and Lung Cancer). The average precisions for identifying 
breast, prostate, and lung cancer genes vary between 80-100%. On a prostate case 
study, the system predicted an average of 80% prostate-related genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that our system has the potential for improving 
the prediction accuracy of identifying gene-gene interaction and disease-gene 
associations. We also conduct a prostate cancer case study by using the 
threshold property in logistic regression, and we compare our approach with some 
of the state-of-the-art methods.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-019-2634-7
PMCID: PMC6368766
PMID: 30736752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.