74. J Biomed Inform. 2018 Dec;88:53-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.11.006. Epub 2018 
Nov 13.

CIBS: A biomedical text summarizer using topic-based sentence clustering.

Moradi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of 
Technology, Isfahan 84156-83111, Iran. Electronic address: 
milad.moradi@ec.iut.ac.ir.

Automatic text summarizers can reduce the time required to read lengthy text 
documents by extracting the most important parts. Multi-document summarizers 
should produce a summary that covers the main topics of multiple related input 
texts to diminish the extent of redundant information. In this paper, we propose 
a novel summarization method named Clustering and Itemset mining based 
Biomedical Summarizer (CIBS). The summarizer extracts biomedical concepts from 
the input documents and employs an itemset mining algorithm to discover main 
topics. Then, it applies a clustering algorithm to put the sentences into 
clusters such that those in the same cluster share similar topics. Selecting 
sentences from all the clusters, the summarizer can produce a summary that 
covers a wide range of topics of the input text. Using the Recall-Oriented 
Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) toolkit, we evaluate the performance 
of the CIBS method against four summarizers including a state-of-the-art method. 
The results show that the CIBS method can improve the performance of single- and 
multi-document biomedical text summarization. It is shown that the topic-based 
sentence clustering approach can be effectively used to increase the informative 
content of summaries, as well as to decrease the redundant information.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.11.006
PMID: 30445218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]