382. J Biomed Inform. 2009 Oct;42(5):773-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2008.12.009. Epub 
2008 Dec 31.

Towards role-based filtering of disease outbreak reports.

Doan S(1), Kawazoe A, Conway M, Collier N.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan. doan@nii.ac.jp

This paper explores the role of named entities (NEs) in the classification of 
disease outbreak report. In the annotation schema of BioCaster, a text mining 
system for public health protection, important concepts that reflect information 
about infectious diseases were conceptually analyzed with a formal ontological 
methodology and classified into types and roles. Types are specified as NE 
classes and roles are integrated into NEs as attributes such as a chemical and 
whether it is being used as a therapy for some infectious disease. We focus on 
the roles of NEs and explore different ways to extract, combine and use them as 
features in a text classifier. In addition, we investigate the combination of 
roles with semantic categories of disease-related nouns and verbs. Experimental 
results using na√Øve Bayes and Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithms show that: 
(1) roles in combination with NEs improve performance in text classification, 
(2) roles in combination with semantic categories of noun and verb features 
contribute substantially to the improvement of text classification. Both these 
results were statistically significant compared to the baseline "raw text" 
representation. We discuss in detail the effects of roles on each NE and on 
semantic categories of noun and verb features in terms of accuracy, 
precision/recall and F-score measures for the text classification task.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2008.12.009
PMID: 19171201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]