166. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58 Suppl(Suppl):S203-10. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbi.2015.08.003. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Coronary artery disease risk assessment from unstructured electronic health 
records using text mining.

Jonnagaddala J(1), Liaw ST(2), Ray P(3), Kumar M(4), Chang NW(5), Dai HJ(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of New South 
Wales, Australia; Asia-Pacific Ubiquitous Healthcare Research Centre, University 
of New South Wales, Australia; Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of 
New South Wales, Australia.
(2)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of New South 
Wales, Australia. Electronic address: siaw@unsw.edu.au.
(3)Asia-Pacific Ubiquitous Healthcare Research Centre, University of New South 
Wales, Australia.
(4)Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Institution of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan; Graduate 
Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, National Taiwan 
University, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taitung 
University, Taiwan. Electronic address: hjdai@nttu.edu.tw.

Coronary artery disease (CAD) often leads to myocardial infarction, which may be 
fatal. Risk factors can be used to predict CAD, which may subsequently lead to 
prevention or early intervention. Patient data such as co-morbidities, 
medication history, social history and family history are required to determine 
the risk factors for a disease. However, risk factor data are usually embedded 
in unstructured clinical narratives if the data is not collected specifically 
for risk assessment purposes. Clinical text mining can be used to extract data 
related to risk factors from unstructured clinical notes. This study presents 
methods to extract Framingham risk factors from unstructured electronic health 
records using clinical text mining and to calculate 10-year coronary artery 
disease risk scores in a cohort of diabetic patients. We developed a rule-based 
system to extract risk factors: age, gender, total cholesterol, HDL-C, blood 
pressure, diabetes history and smoking history. The results showed that the 
output from the text mining system was reliable, but there was a significant 
amount of missing data to calculate the Framingham risk score. A systematic 
approach for understanding missing data was followed by implementation of 
imputation strategies. An analysis of the 10-year Framingham risk scores for 
coronary artery disease in this cohort has shown that the majority of the 
diabetic patients are at moderate risk of CAD.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.08.003
PMCID: PMC4985289
PMID: 26319542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
there are no conflicts of interest.