304. PLoS One. 2019 Sep 12;14(9):e0221720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0221720. 
eCollection 2019.

An artificial intelligent diagnostic system on mobile Android terminals for 
cholelithiasis by lightweight convolutional neural network.

Pang S(1), Wang S(1), Rodríguez-Patón A(2), Li P(3), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer and Communication Engineering, China University of 
Petroleum, Qingdao, Shandong, China.
(2)Departamento de Inteligencia Artificial, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 
Campus de Montegancedo, Boadilla del Monte, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Shandong Provincial Third Hospital, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.

Artificial intelligence (AI) tools have been applied to diagnose or predict 
disease risk from medical images with recent data disclosure actions, but few of 
them are designed for mobile terminals due to the limited computational power 
and storage capacity of mobile devices. In this work, a novel AI diagnostic 
system is proposed for cholelithiasis recognition on mobile devices with Android 
platform. To this aim, a data set of CT images of cholelithiasis is firstly 
collected from The Third Hospital of Shandong Province, China, and then we 
technically use histogram equalization to preprocess these CT images. As 
results, a lightweight convolutional neural network is obtained in a 
constructive way to extract cholelith features and recognize gallstones. In 
terms of implementation, we compile Java and C++ to adapt to the application of 
deep learning algorithm on mobile devices with Android platform. Noted that, the 
training task is completed offline on PC, but cholelithiasis recognition tasks 
are performed on mobile terminals. We evaluate and compare the performance of 
our MobileNetV2 with MobileNetV1, Single Shot Detector (SSD), YOLOv2 and 
original SSD (with VGG-16) as feature extractors for object detection. It is 
achieved that our MobileNetV2 achieve similar accuracy rate, about 91% with the 
other four methods, but the number of parameters used is reduced from 36.1M (SSD 
300, SSD512), 50.7M (Yolov2) and 5.1M (MobileNetV1) to 4.3M (MobileNetV2). The 
complete process on testing mobile devices, including Virtual machine, Xiaomi 7 
and Htc One M8 can be controlled within 4 seconds in recognizing cholelithiasis 
as well as the degree of the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0221720
PMCID: PMC6742400
PMID: 31513631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.