134. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2015 Sep;22(5):980-6. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocv012. Epub 
2015 May 14.

Automating the generation of lexical patterns for processing free text in 
clinical documents.

Meng F(1), Morioka C(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Imaging Informatics Group, Department of Radiological Sciences, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA MAVERIC, VA Boston Healthcare 
System, Boston MA, USA fmeng@mii.ucla.edu.
(2)Medical Imaging Informatics Group, Department of Radiological Sciences, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Department of Radiology, VA 
Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles CA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Many tasks in natural language processing utilize lexical 
pattern-matching techniques, including information extraction (IE), negation 
identification, and syntactic parsing. However, it is generally difficult to 
derive patterns that achieve acceptable levels of recall while also remaining 
highly precise.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We present a multiple sequence alignment (MSA)-based 
technique that automatically generates patterns, thereby leveraging language 
usage to determine the context of words that influence a given target. MSAs 
capture the commonalities among word sequences and are able to reveal areas of 
linguistic stability and variation. In this way, MSAs provide a systemic 
approach to generating lexical patterns that are generalizable, which will both 
increase recall levels and maintain high levels of precision.
RESULTS: The MSA-generated patterns exhibited consistent F1-, F.5-, and F2- 
scores compared to two baseline techniques for IE across four different tasks. 
Both baseline techniques performed well for some tasks and less well for others, 
but MSA was found to consistently perform at a high level for all four tasks.
DISCUSSION: The performance of MSA on the four extraction tasks indicates the 
method's versatility. The results show that the MSA-based patterns are able to 
handle the extraction of individual data elements as well as relations between 
two concepts without the need for large amounts of manual intervention.
CONCLUSION: We presented an MSA-based framework for generating lexical patterns 
that showed consistently high levels of both performance and recall over four 
different extraction tasks when compared to baseline methods.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocv012
PMCID: PMC4986670
PMID: 25977405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]