376. J Biomed Semantics. 2015 Sep 7;6:34. doi: 10.1186/s13326-015-0033-1. eCollection 
2015.

KneeTex: an ontology-driven system for information extraction from MRI reports.

Spasić I(1), Zhao B(1), Jones CB(1), Button K(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF24 
3AA UK.
(2)School of Healthcare Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF14 4XN UK.

BACKGROUND: In the realm of knee pathology, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has 
the advantage of visualising all structures within the knee joint, which makes 
it a valuable tool for increasing diagnostic accuracy and planning surgical 
treatments. Therefore, clinical narratives found in MRI reports convey valuable 
diagnostic information. A range of studies have proven the feasibility of 
natural language processing for information extraction from clinical narratives. 
However, no study focused specifically on MRI reports in relation to knee 
pathology, possibly due to the complexity of knee anatomy and a wide range of 
conditions that may be associated with different anatomical entities. In this 
paper we describe KneeTex, an information extraction system that operates in 
this domain.
METHODS: As an ontology-driven information extraction system, KneeTex makes 
active use of an ontology to strongly guide and constrain text analysis. We used 
automatic term recognition to facilitate the development of a domain-specific 
ontology with sufficient detail and coverage for text mining applications. In 
combination with the ontology, high regularity of the sublanguage used in knee 
MRI reports allowed us to model its processing by a set of sophisticated 
lexico-semantic rules with minimal syntactic analysis. The main processing steps 
involve named entity recognition combined with coordination, enumeration, 
ambiguity and co-reference resolution, followed by text segmentation. 
Ontology-based semantic typing is then used to drive the template filling 
process.
RESULTS: We adopted an existing ontology, TRAK (Taxonomy for RehAbilitation of 
Knee conditions), for use within KneeTex. The original TRAK ontology expanded 
from 1,292 concepts, 1,720 synonyms and 518 relationship instances to 1,621 
concepts, 2,550 synonyms and 560 relationship instances. This provided KneeTex 
with a very fine-grained lexico-semantic knowledge base, which is highly attuned 
to the given sublanguage. Information extraction results were evaluated on a 
test set of 100 MRI reports. A gold standard consisted of 1,259 filled template 
records with the following slots: finding, finding qualifier, negation, 
certainty, anatomy and anatomy qualifier. KneeTex extracted information with 
precision of 98.00 %, recall of 97.63 % and F-measure of 97.81 %, the values of 
which are in line with human-like performance.
CONCLUSIONS: KneeTex is an open-source, stand-alone application for information 
extraction from narrative reports that describe an MRI scan of the knee. Given 
an MRI report as input, the system outputs the corresponding clinical findings 
in the form of JavaScript Object Notation objects. The extracted information is 
mapped onto TRAK, an ontology that formally models knowledge relevant for the 
rehabilitation of knee conditions. As a result, formally structured and coded 
information allows for complex searches to be conducted efficiently over the 
original MRI reports, thereby effectively supporting epidemiologic studies of 
knee conditions.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-015-0033-1
PMCID: PMC4561435
PMID: 26347806