309. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2013 Sep-Oct;20(5):820-7. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001627. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Eventual situations for timeline extraction from clinical reports.

Grouin C(1), Grabar N, Hamon T, Rosset S, Tannier X, Zweigenbaum P.

Author information:
(1)LIMSI-CNRS, Orsay, France.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the temporal relations between clinical events and 
temporal expressions in clinical reports, as defined in the i2b2/VA 2012 
challenge.
DESIGN: To detect clinical events, we used rules and Conditional Random Fields. 
We built Random Forest models to identify event modality and polarity. To 
identify temporal expressions we built on the HeidelTime system. To detect 
temporal relations, we systematically studied their breakdown into distinct 
situations; we designed an oracle method to determine the most prominent 
situations and the most suitable associated classifiers, and combined their 
results.
RESULTS: We achieved F-measures of 0.8307 for event identification, based on 
rules, and 0.8385 for temporal expression identification. In the temporal 
relation task, we identified nine main situations in three groups, 
experimentally confirming shared intuitions: within-sentence relations, 
section-related time, and across-sentence relations. Logistic regression and 
Na√Øve Bayes performed best on the first and third groups, and decision trees on 
the second. We reached a 0.6231 global F-measure, improving by 7.5 points our 
official submission.
CONCLUSIONS: Carefully hand-crafted rules obtained good results for the 
detection of events and temporal expressions, while a combination of classifiers 
improved temporal link prediction. The characterization of the oracle recall of 
situations allowed us to point at directions where further work would be most 
useful for temporal relation detection: within-sentence relations and linking 
History of Present Illness events to the admission date. We suggest that the 
systematic situation breakdown proposed in this paper could also help improve 
other systems addressing this task.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001627
PMCID: PMC3756272
PMID: 23571851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]