105. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2020 Jun 16;270:347-351. doi: 10.3233/SHTI200180.

On the Construction of Multilingual Corpora for Clinical Text Mining.

Villena F(1)(2), Eisenmann U(1), Knaup P(1), Dunstan J(2)(3), Ganzinger M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics, Heidelberg University, 
Germany.
(2)Center of Medical Informatics and Telemedicine, University of Chile, Chile.
(3)Center for Mathematical Modeling, University of Chile, Chile.

The amount of digital data derived from healthcare processes have increased 
tremendously in the last years. This applies especially to unstructured data, 
which are often hard to analyze due to the lack of available tools to process 
and extract information. Natural language processing is often used in medicine, 
but the majority of tools used by researchers are developed primarily for the 
English language. For developing and testing natural language processing 
methods, it is important to have a suitable corpus, specific to the medical 
domain that covers the intended target language. To improve the potential of 
natural language processing research, we developed tools to derive language 
specific medical corpora from publicly available text sources. n order to 
extract medicine-specific unstructured text data, openly available pub-lications 
from biomedical journals were used in a four-step process: (1) medical journal 
databases were scraped to download the articles, (2) the articles were parsed 
and consolidated into a single repository, (3) the content of the repository was 
de-scribed, and (4) the text data and the codes were released. In total, 93 969 
articles were retrieved, with a word count of 83 868 501 in three different 
languages (German, English, and Spanish) from two medical journal databases Our 
results show that unstructured text data extraction from openly available 
medical journal databases for the construction of unified corpora of medical 
text data can be achieved through web scraping techniques.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI200180
PMID: 32570404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]