505. Neuroinformatics. 2003;1(3):215-37. doi: 10.1385/NI:1:3:215.

Text mining neuroscience journal articles to populate neuroscience databases.

Crasto CJ(1), Marenco LN, Migliore M, Mao B, Nadkarni PM, Miller P, Shepherd GM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Informatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 
chiquito.crasto@yale.edu

We have developed a program NeuroText to populate the neuroscience databases in 
SenseLab (http://senselab.med.yale.edu/senselab) by mining the natural language 
text of neuroscience articles. NeuroText uses a two-step approach to identify 
relevant articles. The first step (pre-processing), aimed at 100% sensitivity, 
identifies abstracts containing database keywords. In the second step, 
potentially relevant abstracts identified in the first step are processed for 
specificity dictated by database architecture, and neuroscience, lexical and 
semantic contexts. NeuroText results were presented to the experts for 
validation using a dynamically generated interface that also allows 
expert-validated articles to be automatically deposited into the databases. Of 
the test set of 912 articles, 735 were rejected at the pre-processing step. For 
the remaining articles, the accuracy of predicting database-relevant articles 
was 85%. Twenty-two articles were erroneously identified. NeuroText deferred 
decisions on 29 articles to the expert. A comparison of NeuroText results versus 
the experts' analyses revealed that the program failed to correctly identify 
articles' relevance due to concepts that did not yet exist in the knowledgebase 
or due to vaguely presented information in the abstracts. NeuroText uses two 
"evolution" techniques (supervised and unsupervised) that play an important role 
in the continual improvement of the retrieval results. Software that uses the 
NeuroText approach can facilitate the creation of curated, special-interest, 
bibliography databases.

DOI: 10.1385/NI:1:3:215
PMID: 15046245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]