298. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2009 May;94(2):190-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2008.12.006. Epub 2009 Jan 30.

Arrowsmith two-node search interface: a tutorial on finding meaningful links 
between two disparate sets of articles in MEDLINE.

Smalheiser NR(1), Torvik VI, Zhou W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychiatric Institute, MC912, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, 1601W. Taylor Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. neils@uic.edu

The Arrowsmith two-node search is a strategy that is designed to assist 
biomedical investigators in formulating and assessing scientific hypotheses. 
More generally, it allows users to identify biologically meaningful links 
between any two sets of articles A and C in PubMed, even when these share no 
articles or authors in common and represent disparate topics or disciplines. The 
key idea is to relate the two sets of articles via title words and phrases 
(B-terms) that they share. We have created a free, public web-based version of 
the two-node search tool (http://arrowsmith.psych.uic.edu), have described its 
development and implementation, and have presented analyses of individual 
two-node searches. In this paper, we provide an updated tutorial intended for 
end-users, that covers the use of the tool for a variety of potential scientific 
use case scenarios. For example, one can assess a recent experimental, clinical 
or epidemiologic finding that connects two disparate fields of 
inquiry--identifying likely mechanisms to explain the finding, and choosing 
promising follow-up lines of investigation. Alternatively, one can assess 
whether the existing scientific literature lends indirect support to a 
hypothesis posed by the user that has not yet been investigated. One can also 
employ two-node searches to search for novel hypotheses. Arrowsmith provides a 
service that cannot be carried out feasibly via standard PubMed searches or by 
other available text mining tools.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2008.12.006
PMCID: PMC2693227
PMID: 19185946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.