225. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 2;9(1):e83932. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083932. eCollection 
2014.

Automatic extraction of nanoparticle properties using natural language 
processing: NanoSifter an application to acquire PAMAM dendrimer properties.

Jones DE(1), Igo S(2), Hurdle J(1), Facelli JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, United States of America ; Center for High Performance Computing, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

In this study, we demonstrate the use of natural language processing methods to 
extract, from nanomedicine literature, numeric values of biomedical property 
terms of poly(amidoamine) dendrimers. We have developed a method for extracting 
these values for properties taken from the NanoParticle Ontology, using the 
General Architecture for Text Engineering and a Nearly-New Information 
Extraction System. We also created a method for associating the identified 
numeric values with their corresponding dendrimer properties, called NanoSifter. 
We demonstrate that our system can correctly extract numeric values of dendrimer 
properties reported in the cancer treatment literature with high recall, 
precision, and f-measure. The micro-averaged recall was 0.99, precision was 
0.84, and f-measure was 0.91. Similarly, the macro-averaged recall was 0.99, 
precision was 0.87, and f-measure was 0.92. To our knowledge, these results are 
the first application of text mining to extract and associate dendrimer property 
terms and their corresponding numeric values.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083932
PMCID: PMC3879259
PMID: 24392101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.