387. Bioinformatics. 2020 Jan 1;36(1):264-271. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz490.

CoCoScore: context-aware co-occurrence scoring for text mining applications 
using distant supervision.

Junge A(1), Jensen LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Disease Systems Biology Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein 
Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen N 2200, Denmark.

MOTIVATION: Information extraction by mining the scientific literature is key to 
uncovering relations between biomedical entities. Most existing approaches based 
on natural language processing extract relations from single sentence-level 
co-mentions, ignoring co-occurrence statistics over the whole corpus. Existing 
approaches counting entity co-occurrences ignore the textual context of each 
co-occurrence.
RESULTS: We propose a novel corpus-wide co-occurrence scoring approach to 
relation extraction that takes the textual context of each co-mention into 
account. Our method, called CoCoScore, scores the certainty of stating an 
association for each sentence that co-mentions two entities. CoCoScore is 
trained using distant supervision based on a gold-standard set of associations 
between entities of interest. Instead of requiring a manually annotated training 
corpus, co-mentions are labeled as positives/negatives according to their 
presence/absence in the gold standard. We show that CoCoScore outperforms 
previous approaches in identifying human disease-gene and tissue-gene 
associations as well as in identifying physical and functional protein-protein 
associations in different species. CoCoScore is a versatile text mining tool to 
uncover pairwise associations via co-occurrence mining, within and beyond 
biomedical applications.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: CoCoScore is available at: 
https://github.com/JungeAlexander/cocoscore.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz490
PMCID: PMC6956794
PMID: 31199464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]