584. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2018 Dec 5;2018:1263-1272. eCollection 2018.

Exploring Older Adults' Strengths, Problems, and Wellbeing Using De-identified 
Electronic Health Record Data.

Gao G(1), Pieczkiewicz D(2), Kerr M(1), Lindquist R(1), Chi CL(1), Maganti S(3), 
Austin R(1), Kreitzer MJ(4), Todd K(5), Monsen KA(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
(2)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 
55455.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455.
(4)Center for Spirituality and Healing, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 
55455.
(5)The Waters, Minnetonka, MN 55305.

As new data sources including individuals' strengths emerge in electronic health 
records, such data provide whole-person oriented information to generate 
integrated knowledge for person-centered practice. The purpose of this study is 
to describe older adults' strengths and problems within a wellbeing context 
documented by the Omaha System. The Wellbeing Model is employed as a conceptual 
framework for wellbeing and is operationalized by the Omaha System Problem 
Classification Scheme. This study has a retrospective, descriptive design using 
de-identified EHR data of wellbeing assessments including problems, strengths, 
and signs/symptoms for a convenience sample of 440 assisted-living residents in 
a Midwest metropolitan area. Descriptive statistics and data visualization were 
used to summarize and display strength and signs/symptom attributes within 
wellbeing contexts. The study reveals cutting-edge knowledge regarding older 
adults' strengths and wellbeing, and creates a platform for further research use 
of a strength-based ontology in clinical practice and electronic system of 
documentation.

PMCID: PMC6371293
PMID: 30815168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]