28. Yearb Med Inform. 2016 Jun 30;Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S23-31. doi: 
10.15265/IYS-2016-s004.

Imaging Informatics: 25 Years of Progress.

Agrawal JP, Erickson BJ, Kahn CE Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Charles E. Kahn, Jr., Department of Radiology, 3400 Spruce Street, 1 
Silverstein, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, E-mail: charles.kahn@uphs.upenn.edu.

The science and applications of informatics in medical imaging have advanced 
dramatically in the past 25 years. This article provides a selective overview of 
key developments in medical imaging informatics. Advances in standards and 
technologies for compression and transmission of digital images have enabled 
Picture Archiving and Communications Systems (PACS) and teleradiology. Research 
in speech recognition, structured reporting, ontologies, and natural language 
processing has improved the ability to generate and analyze the reports of 
imaging procedures. Informatics has provided tools to address workflow and 
ergonomic issues engendered by the growing volume of medical image information. 
Research in computeraided detection and diagnosis of abnormalities in medical 
images has opened new avenues to improve patient care. The growing number of 
medical-imaging examinations and their large volumes of information create a 
natural platform for "big data" analytics, particularly when joined with 
high-dimensional genomic data. Radiogenomics investigates relationships between 
a disease's genetic and gene-expression characteristics and its imaging 
phenotype; this emerging field promises to help us better understand disease 
biology, prognosis, and treatment options. The next 25 years offer remarkable 
opportunities for informatics and medical imaging together to lead to further 
advances in both disciplines and to improve health.

DOI: 10.15265/IYS-2016-s004
PMCID: PMC5171495
PMID: 27362590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]