312. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Aug;56:42-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.05.004. Epub 2015 
May 21.

Automatic endpoint detection to support the systematic review process.

Blake C(1), Lucic A(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Library and Information Science and Medical Information 
Science, Center for Informatics Research in Science and Scholarship (CIRSS), 
University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign, 501 E. Daniel Street, MC-493, 
Champaign, IL 61820-6211, USA. Electronic address: clblake@illinois.edu.
(2)Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois, 
Urbana Champaign, 501 E. Daniel Street, MC-493, Champaign, IL 61820-6211, USA. 
Electronic address: alucic2@illinois.edu.

Preparing a systematic review can take hundreds of hours to complete, but the 
process of reconciling different results from multiple studies is the bedrock of 
evidence-based medicine. We introduce a two-step approach to automatically 
extract three facets - two entities (the agent and object) and the way in which 
the entities are compared (the endpoint) - from direct comparative sentences in 
full-text articles. The system does not require a user to predefine entities in 
advance and thus can be used in domains where entity recognition is difficult or 
unavailable. As with a systematic review, the tabular summary produced using the 
automatically extracted facets shows how experimental results differ between 
studies. Experiments were conducted using a collection of more than 2million 
sentences from three journals Diabetes, Carcinogenesis and Endocrinology and two 
machine learning algorithms, support vector machines (SVM) and a general linear 
model (GLM). F1 and accuracy measures for the SVM and GLM differed by only 0.01 
across all three comparison facets in a randomly selected set of test sentences. 
The system achieved the best performance of 92% for objects, whereas the 
accuracy for both agent and endpoints was 73%. F1 scores were higher for objects 
(0.77) than for endpoints (0.51) or agents (0.47). A situated evaluation of 
Metformin, a drug to treat diabetes, showed system accuracy of 95%, 83% and 79% 
for the object, endpoint and agent respectively. The situated evaluation had 
higher F1 scores of 0.88, 0.64 and 0.62 for object, endpoint, and agent 
respectively. On average, only 5.31% of the sentences in a full-text article are 
direct comparisons, but the tabular summaries suggest that these sentences 
provide a rich source of currently underutilized information that can be used to 
accelerate the systematic review process and identify gaps where future research 
should be focused.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.05.004
PMID: 26003938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]