360. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Oct 1;9:406. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-406.

BibGlimpse: the case for a light-weight reprint manager in distributed 
literature research.

TÃ¼chler T(1), Velez G, Graf A, Kreil DP.

Author information:
(1)Chair of Bioinformatics, Boku University, Vienna, Austria. 
thomas.tuechler@boku.ac.at

BACKGROUND: While text-mining and distributed annotation systems both aim at 
capturing knowledge and presenting it in a standardized form, there have been 
few attempts to investigate potential synergies between these two fields. For 
instance, distributed annotation would be very well suited for providing topic 
focussed, expert knowledge enriched text corpora. A key limitation for this 
approach is the availability of literature annotation systems that can be 
routinely used by groups of collaborating researchers on a day to day basis, not 
distracting from the main focus of their work.
RESULTS: For this purpose, we have designed BibGlimpse. Features like 
drop-to-file, SVM based automated retrieval of PubMed bibliography for PDF 
reprints, and annotation support make BibGlimpse an efficient, light-weight 
reprint manager that facilitates distributed literature research for work 
groups. Building on an established open search engine, full-text search and 
structured queries are supported, while at the same time making shared 
collections of annotated reprints accessible to literature classification and 
text-mining tools.
CONCLUSION: BibGlimpse offers scientists a tool that enhances their own 
literature management. Moreover, it may be used to create content enriched, 
annotated text corpora for research in text-mining.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-406
PMCID: PMC2571996
PMID: 18828894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]