69. Database (Oxford). 2015 Jan 25;2015:bau129. doi: 10.1093/database/bau129. Print 
2015.

OntoMate: a text-mining tool aiding curation at the Rat Genome Database.

Liu W(1), Laulederkind SJ(2), Hayman GT(3), Wang SJ(3), Nigam R(3), Smith JR(3), 
De Pons J(3), Dwinell MR(1), Shimoyama M(1).

Author information:
(1)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Department 
of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Department of Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin and Department of 
Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd, Milwaukee, WI 
53226-3548, USA Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Department of Physiology, Medical College of 
Wisconsin and Department of Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 
Watertown Plank Rd, Milwaukee, WI 53226-3548, USA.
(2)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Department 
of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Department of Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin and Department of 
Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd, Milwaukee, WI 
53226-3548, USA slaulederkind@mcw.edu.
(3)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Department 
of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Department of Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin and Department of 
Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd, Milwaukee, WI 
53226-3548, USA.

The Rat Genome Database (RGD) is the premier repository of rat genomic, genetic 
and physiologic data. Converting data from free text in the scientific 
literature to a structured format is one of the main tasks of all model organism 
databases. RGD spends considerable effort manually curating gene, Quantitative 
Trait Locus (QTL) and strain information. The rapidly growing volume of 
biomedical literature and the active research in the biological natural language 
processing (bioNLP) community have given RGD the impetus to adopt text-mining 
tools to improve curation efficiency. Recently, RGD has initiated a project to 
use OntoMate, an ontology-driven, concept-based literature search engine 
developed at RGD, as a replacement for the PubMed 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) search engine in the gene curation 
workflow. OntoMate tags abstracts with gene names, gene mutations, organism name 
and most of the 16 ontologies/vocabularies used at RGD. All terms/ entities 
tagged to an abstract are listed with the abstract in the search results. All 
listed terms are linked both to data entry boxes and a term browser in the 
curation tool. OntoMate also provides user-activated filters for species, date 
and other parameters relevant to the literature search. Using the system for 
literature search and import has streamlined the process compared to using 
PubMed. The system was built with a scalable and open architecture, including 
features specifically designed to accelerate the RGD gene curation process. With 
the use of bioNLP tools, RGD has added more automation to its curation workflow. 
Database URL: http://rgd.mcw.edu.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bau129
PMCID: PMC4305386
PMID: 25619558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]