202. J Biomed Inform. 2019 Apr;92:103137. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103137. Epub 2019 
Feb 23.

Automatic inference of BI-RADS final assessment categories from narrative 
mammography report findings.

Banerjee I(1), Bozkurt S(2), Alkim E(3), Sagreiya H(4), Kurian AW(5), Rubin 
DL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. Electronic address: imonb@stanford.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of Biostatistics and Medical 
Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya 07059, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(5)Medicine (Oncology) and Health Research and Policy, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

We propose an efficient natural language processing approach for inferring the 
BI-RADS final assessment categories by analyzing only the mammogram findings 
reported by the mammographer in narrative form. The proposed hybrid method 
integrates semantic term embedding with distributional semantics, producing a 
context-aware vector representation of unstructured mammography reports. A large 
corpus of unannotated mammography reports (300,000) was used to learn the 
context of the key-terms using a distributional semantics approach, and the 
trained model was applied to generate context-aware vector representations of 
the reports annotated with BI-RADS category (22,091). The vectorized reports 
were utilized to train a supervised classifier to derive the BI-RADS assessment 
class. Even though the majority of the proposed embedding pipeline is 
unsupervised, the classifier was able to recognize substantial semantic 
information for deriving the BI-RADS categorization not only on a holdout 
internal testset and also on an external validation set (1900 reports). Our 
proposed method outperforms a recently published domain-specific rule-based 
system and could be relevant for evaluating concordance between radiologists. 
With minimal requirement for task specific customization, the proposed method 
can be easily transferable to a different domain to support large scale text 
mining or derivation of patient phenotype.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103137
PMCID: PMC6462247
PMID: 30807833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]