316. J Biomed Inform. 2007 Oct;40(5):453-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2007.01.001. Epub 
2007 Jan 17.

Global mapping of gene/protein interactions in PubMed abstracts: a framework and 
an experiment with P53 interactions.

Li X(1), Chen H, Huang Z, Su H, Martinez JD.

Author information:
(1)Artificial Intelligence Lab, Department of Management Information Systems, 
The University of Arizona, McClelland Hall, Tucson, AZ 85721-0108, USA. 
xinli@email.arizona.edu <xinli@email.arizona.edu>

Gene/protein interactions provide critical information for a thorough 
understanding of cellular processes. Recently, considerable interest and effort 
has been focused on the construction and analysis of genome-wide gene networks. 
The large body of biomedical literature is an important source of gene/protein 
interaction information. Recent advances in text mining tools have made it 
possible to automatically extract such documented interactions from free-text 
literature. In this paper, we propose a comprehensive framework for constructing 
and analyzing large-scale gene functional networks based on the gene/protein 
interactions extracted from biomedical literature repositories using text mining 
tools. Our proposed framework consists of analyses of the network topology, 
network topology-gene function relationship, and temporal network evolution to 
distill valuable information embedded in the gene functional interactions in the 
literature. We demonstrate the application of the proposed framework using a 
testbed of P53-related PubMed abstracts, which shows that the literature-based 
P53 networks exhibit small-world and scale-free properties. We also found that 
high degree genes in the literature-based networks have a high probability of 
appearing in the manually curated database and genes in the same pathway tend to 
form local clusters in our literature-based networks. Temporal analysis showed 
that genes interacting with many other genes tend to be involved in a large 
number of newly discovered interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2007.01.001
PMCID: PMC2047827
PMID: 17317333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]