198. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2010 Sep-Oct;17(5):549-54. doi: 
10.1136/jamia.2010.004036.

Linguistic approach for identification of medication names and related 
information in clinical narratives.

Hamon T(1), Grabar N.

Author information:
(1)UFR SMBH Léonard de Vinci, Université Paris 13, 93017 Bobigny Cedex, France. 
thierry.hamon@univ-paris13.fr

BACKGROUND: Pharmacotherapy is an integral part of any medical care process and 
plays an important role in the medical history of most patients. Information on 
medication is crucial for several tasks such as pharmacovigilance, medical 
decision or biomedical research.
OBJECTIVES: Within a narrative text, medication-related information can be 
buried within other non-relevant data. Specific methods, such as those provided 
by text mining, must be designed for accessing them, and this is the objective 
of this study.
METHODS: The authors designed a system for analyzing narrative clinical 
documents to extract from them medication occurrences and medication-related 
information. The system also attempts to deduce medications not covered by the 
dictionaries used.
RESULTS: Results provided by the system were evaluated within the framework of 
the I2B2 NLP challenge held in 2009. The system achieved an F-measure of 0.78 
and ranked 7th out of 20 participating teams (the highest F-measure was 0.86). 
The system provided good results for the annotation and extraction of medication 
names, their frequency, dosage and mode of administration (F-measure over 0.81), 
while information on duration and reasons is poorly annotated and extracted 
(F-measure 0.36 and 0.29, respectively). The performance of the system was 
stable between the training and test sets.

DOI: 10.1136/jamia.2010.004036
PMCID: PMC2995681
PMID: 20819862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.