281. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58 Suppl(Suppl):S183-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbi.2015.06.013. Epub 2015 Jun 29.

Using local lexicalized rules to identify heart disease risk factors in clinical 
notes.

Karystianis G(1), Dehghan A(1), Kovacevic A(2), Keane JA(3), Nenadic G(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; The 
Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(2)Faculty of Technical Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(3)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, UK.
(4)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; Health 
eResearch Centre, The Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, Manchester, 
UK; Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, UK. 
Electronic address: g.nenadic@manchester.ac.uk.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death globally and a significant part of 
the human population lives with it. A number of risk factors have been 
recognized as contributing to the disease, including obesity, coronary artery 
disease (CAD), hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, smoking, and family 
history of premature CAD. This paper describes and evaluates a methodology to 
extract mentions of such risk factors from diabetic clinical notes, which was a 
task of the i2b2/UTHealth 2014 Challenge in Natural Language Processing for 
Clinical Data. The methodology is knowledge-driven and the system implements 
local lexicalized rules (based on syntactical patterns observed in notes) 
combined with manually constructed dictionaries that characterize the domain. A 
part of the task was also to detect the time interval in which the risk factors 
were present in a patient. The system was applied to an evaluation set of 514 
unseen notes and achieved a micro-average F-score of 88% (with 86% precision and 
90% recall). While the identification of CAD family history, medication and some 
of the related disease factors (e.g. hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia) 
showed quite good results, the identification of CAD-specific indicators proved 
to be more challenging (F-score of 74%). Overall, the results are encouraging 
and suggested that automated text mining methods can be used to process clinical 
notes to identify risk factors and monitor progression of heart disease on a 
large-scale, providing necessary data for clinical and epidemiological studies.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.06.013
PMCID: PMC4974302
PMID: 26133479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.