227. J Biomed Inform. 2013 Dec;46 Suppl:S54-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.09.007. Epub 
2013 Sep 20.

TEMPTING system: a hybrid method of rule and machine learning for temporal 
relation extraction in patient discharge summaries.

Chang YC(1), Dai HJ, Wu JC, Chen JM, Tsai RT, Hsu WL.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan, 
ROC; Department of Information Management, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC.

Patient discharge summaries provide detailed medical information about 
individuals who have been hospitalized. To make a precise and legitimate 
assessment of the abundant data, a proper time layout of the sequence of 
relevant events should be compiled and used to drive a patient-specific 
timeline, which could further assist medical personnel in making clinical 
decisions. The process of identifying the chronological order of entities is 
called temporal relation extraction. In this paper, we propose a hybrid method 
to identify appropriate temporal links between a pair of entities. The method 
combines two approaches: one is rule-based and the other is based on the maximum 
entropy model. We develop an integration algorithm to fuse the results of the 
two approaches. All rules and the integration algorithm are formally stated so 
that one can easily reproduce the system and results. To optimize the system's 
configuration, we used the 2012 i2b2 challenge TLINK track dataset and applied 
threefold cross validation to the training set. Then, we evaluated its 
performance on the training and test datasets. The experiment results show that 
the proposed TEMPTING (TEMPoral relaTion extractING) system (ranked seventh) 
achieved an F-score of 0.563, which was at least 30% better than that of the 
baseline system, which randomly selects TLINK candidates from all pairs and 
assigns the TLINK types. The TEMPTING system using the hybrid method also 
outperformed the stage-based TEMPTING system. Its F-scores were 3.51% and 0.97% 
better than those of the stage-based system on the training set and test set, 
respectively.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.09.007
PMID: 24060600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]