323. Database (Oxford). 2017 Jan 1;2017(1):baw156. doi: 10.1093/database/baw156.

BELMiner: adapting a rule-based relation extraction system to extract biological 
expression language statements from bio-medical literature evidence sentences.

Ravikumar KE(1), Rastegar-Mojarad M(1)(2), Liu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, USA and.
(2)Department of Health Informatics and Administration, University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Extracting meaningful relationships with semantic significance from biomedical 
literature is often a challenging task. BioCreative V track4 challenge for the 
first time has organized a comprehensive shared task to test the robustness of 
the text-mining algorithms in extracting semantically meaningful assertions from 
the evidence statement in biomedical text. In this work, we tested the ability 
of a rule-based semantic parser to extract Biological Expression Language (BEL) 
statements from evidence sentences culled out of biomedical literature as part 
of BioCreative V Track4 challenge. The system achieved an overall best F-measure 
of 21.29% in extracting the complete BEL statement. For relation extraction, the 
system achieved an F-measure of 65.13% on test data set. Our system achieved the 
best performance in five of the six criteria that was adopted for evaluation by 
the task organizers. Lack of ability to derive semantic inferences, limitation 
in the rule sets to map the textual extractions to BEL function were some of the 
reasons for low performance in extracting the complete BEL statement. Post 
shared task we also evaluated the impact of differential NER components on the 
ability to extract BEL statements on the test data sets besides making a single 
change in the rule sets that translate relation extractions into a BEL 
statement. There is a marked improvement by over 20% in the overall performance 
of the BELMiner's capability to extract BEL statement on the test set. The 
system is available as a REST-API at 
http://54.146.11.205:8484/BELXtractor/finder/.
DATABASE URL: http://54.146.11.205:8484/BELXtractor/finder/.

Â© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baw156
PMCID: PMC5467463
PMID: 28365720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]