631. Database (Oxford). 2016 Feb 11;2016:bav121. doi: 10.1093/database/bav121. Print 
2016.

Portal of medical data models: information infrastructure for medical research 
and healthcare.

Dugas M(1), Neuhaus P(2), Meidt A(2), Doods J(2), Storck M(2), Bruland P(2), 
Varghese J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of Münster, Germany European 
Research Center for Information Systems (ERCIS) dugas@uni-muenster.de.
(2)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of Münster, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Information systems are a key success factor for medical research 
and healthcare. Currently, most of these systems apply heterogeneous and 
proprietary data models, which impede data exchange and integrated data analysis 
for scientific purposes. Due to the complexity of medical terminology, the 
overall number of medical data models is very high. At present, the vast 
majority of these models are not available to the scientific community. The 
objective of the Portal of Medical Data Models (MDM, 
https://medical-data-models.org) is to foster sharing of medical data models.
METHODS: MDM is a registered European information infrastructure. It provides a 
multilingual platform for exchange and discussion of data models in medicine, 
both for medical research and healthcare. The system is developed in 
collaboration with the University Library of Münster to ensure sustainability. A 
web front-end enables users to search, view, download and discuss data models. 
Eleven different export formats are available (ODM, PDF, CDA, CSV, MACRO-XML, 
REDCap, SQL, SPSS, ADL, R, XLSX). MDM contents were analysed with descriptive 
statistics.
RESULTS: MDM contains 4387 current versions of data models (in total 10,963 
versions). 2475 of these models belong to oncology trials. The most common 
keyword (n = 3826) is 'Clinical Trial'; most frequent diseases are breast 
cancer, leukemia, lung and colorectal neoplasms. Most common languages of data 
elements are English (n = 328,557) and German (n = 68,738). Semantic annotations 
(UMLS codes) are available for 108,412 data items, 2453 item groups and 35,361 
code list items. Overall 335,087 UMLS codes are assigned with 21,847 unique 
codes. Few UMLS codes are used several thousand times, but there is a long tail 
of rarely used codes in the frequency distribution.
DISCUSSION: Expected benefits of the MDM portal are improved and accelerated 
design of medical data models by sharing best practice, more standardised data 
models with semantic annotation and better information exchange between 
information systems, in particular Electronic Data Capture (EDC) and Electronic 
Health Records (EHR) systems. Contents of the MDM portal need to be further 
expanded to reach broad coverage of all relevant medical domains. Database URL: 
https://medical-data-models.org.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bav121
PMCID: PMC4750548
PMID: 26868052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]