30. J Digit Imaging. 2018 Jun;31(3):361-370. doi: 10.1007/s10278-018-0088-5.

A Platform for Innovation and Standards Evaluation: a Case Study from the 
OpenMRS Open-Source Radiology Information System.

Gichoya JW(1), Kohli M(2), Ivange L(3), Schmidt TS(4), Purkayastha S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 550 N. 
University Blvd. Room 0641, Indianapolis, IN, 46202-2879, USA. jgichoya@iu.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, 500 Parnassus Ave, M-391, San Francisco, CA, 94134, USA.
(3)University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Marquette University, 1515 W Wisconsin 
Ave, Milwaukee, WI, 53233, USA.
(5)Department of BioHealth Informatics, School of Informatics and Computing, 
Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, Office: 119 Walker Plaza 
(WK), 719 Indiana Avenue, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.

Open-source development can provide a platform for innovation by seeking 
feedback from community members as well as providing tools and infrastructure to 
test new standards. Vendors of proprietary systems may delay adoption of new 
standards until there are sufficient incentives such as legal mandates or 
financial incentives to encourage/mandate adoption. Moreover, open-source 
systems in healthcare have been widely adopted in low- and middle-income 
countries and can be used to bridge gaps that exist in global health radiology. 
Since 2011, the authors, along with a community of open-source contributors, 
have worked on developing an open-source radiology information system (RIS) 
across two communities-OpenMRS and LibreHealth. The main purpose of the RIS is 
to implement core radiology workflows, on which others can build and test new 
radiology standards. This work has resulted in three major releases of the 
system, with current architectural changes driven by changing technology, 
development of new standards in health and imaging informatics, and changing 
user needs. At their core, both these communities are focused on building 
general-purpose EHR systems, but based on user contributions from the fringes, 
we have been able to create an innovative system that has been used by hospitals 
and clinics in four different countries. We provide an overview of the history 
of the LibreHealth RIS, the architecture of the system, overview of standards 
integration, describe challenges of developing an open-source product, and 
future directions. Our goal is to attract more participation and involvement to 
further develop the LibreHealth RIS into an Enterprise Imaging System that can 
be used in other clinical imaging including pathology and dermatology.

DOI: 10.1007/s10278-018-0088-5
PMCID: PMC5959837
PMID: 29748851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]