92. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Dec;41(12):8071-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3705-5. Epub 2014 
Sep 10.

Text mining and network analysis of molecular interaction in non-small cell lung 
cancer by using natural language processing.

Li J(1), Bi L, Sun Y, Lu Z, Lin Y, Bai O, Shao H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, 130031, Jilin, People's Republic of China.

Retraction in
    Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1489.

Lung cancer including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung 
cancer is one of the most aggressive tumors with high incidence and low survival 
rate. The typical NSCLC patients account for 80-85 % of the total lung cancer 
patients. To systemically explore the molecular mechanisms of NSCLC, we 
performed a molecular network analysis between human and mouse to identify key 
genes (pathways) involved in the occurrence of NSCLC. We automatically extracted 
the human-to-mouse orthologous interactions using the GeneWays system by natural 
language processing and further constructed molecular (gene and its products) 
networks by mapping the human-to-mouse interactions to NSCLC-related mammalian 
phenotypes, followed by module analysis using ClusterONE of Cytoscape and 
pathway enrichment analysis using the database for annotation, visualization and 
integrated discovery (DAVID) successively. A total of 70 genes were proven to be 
related to the mammalian phenotypes of NSCLC, and seven genes (ATAD5, BECN1, 
CDKN2A, FNTB, E2F1, KRAS and PTEN) were found to have a bearing on more than one 
mammalian phenotype (MP) each. Four network clusters centered by four genes 
thyroglobulin (TG), neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1 ), neurofibromatosis type 2 
(NF2 ) and E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1) were generated. Genes in the four 
network modules were enriched in eight KEGG pathways (p value < 0.05), including 
pathways in cancer, small cell lung cancer, cell cycle and p53 signaling 
pathway. Genes p53 and E2F1 may play important roles in NSCLC occurrence, and 
thus can be considered as therapeutic targets for NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-014-3705-5
PMID: 25205120