120. J Biomed Inform. 2013 Apr;46(2):200-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2012.10.007. Epub 
2012 Nov 15.

Biomedical text mining and its applications in cancer research.

Zhu F(1), Patumcharoenpol P, Zhang C, Yang Y, Chan J, Meechai A, Vongsangnak W, 
Shen B.

Author information:
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.

Cancer is a malignant disease that has caused millions of human deaths. Its 
study has a long history of well over 100years. There have been an enormous 
number of publications on cancer research. This integrated but unstructured 
biomedical text is of great value for cancer diagnostics, treatment, and 
prevention. The immense body and rapid growth of biomedical text on cancer has 
led to the appearance of a large number of text mining techniques aimed at 
extracting novel knowledge from scientific text. Biomedical text mining on 
cancer research is computationally automatic and high-throughput in nature. 
However, it is error-prone due to the complexity of natural language processing. 
In this review, we introduce the basic concepts underlying text mining and 
examine some frequently used algorithms, tools, and data sets, as well as 
assessing how much these algorithms have been utilized. We then discuss the 
current state-of-the-art text mining applications in cancer research and we also 
provide some resources for cancer text mining. With the development of systems 
biology, researchers tend to understand complex biomedical systems from a 
systems biology viewpoint. Thus, the full utilization of text mining to 
facilitate cancer systems biology research is fast becoming a major concern. To 
address this issue, we describe the general workflow of text mining in cancer 
systems biology and each phase of the workflow. We hope that this review can (i) 
provide a useful overview of the current work of this field; (ii) help 
researchers to choose text mining tools and datasets; and (iii) highlight how to 
apply text mining to assist cancer systems biology research.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2012.10.007
PMID: 23159498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]