10. Health Informatics J. 2020 Sep;26(3):1777-1794. doi: 10.1177/1460458219889798. 
Epub 2019 Dec 10.

Medication-rights detection using incident reports: A natural language 
processing and deep neural network approach.

Wong ZS(1), So HY, Kwok BS, Lai MW, Sun DT(2).

Author information:
(1)St. Luke's International University, Japan.
(2)New Territories East Cluster (NTEC), Hong Kong.

Medication errors often occurred due to the breach of medication rights that are 
the right patient, the right drug, the right time, the right dose and the right 
route. The aim of this study was to develop a medication-rights detection system 
using natural language processing and deep neural networks to automate 
medication-incident identification using free-text incident reports. We assessed 
the performance of deep neural network models in classifying the Advanced 
Incident Reporting System reports and compared the models' performance with that 
of other common classification methods (including logistic regression, support 
vector machines and the decision-tree method). We also evaluated the effects on 
prediction outcomes of several deep neural network model settings, including 
number of layers, number of neurons and activation regularisation functions. The 
accuracy of the models was measured at 0.9 or above across model settings and 
algorithms. The average values obtained for accuracy and area under the curve 
were 0.940 (standard deviation: 0.011) and 0.911 (standard deviation: 0.019), 
respectively. It is shown that deep neural network models were more accurate 
than the other classifiers across all of the tested class labels (including 
wrong patient, wrong drug, wrong time, wrong dose and wrong route). The deep 
neural network method outperformed other binary classifiers and our default base 
case model, and parameter arguments setting generally performed well for the 
five medication-rights datasets. The medication-rights detection system 
developed in this study successfully uses a natural language processing and 
deep-learning approach to classify patient-safety incidents using the Advanced 
Incident Reporting System reports, which may be transferable to other mandatory 
and voluntary incident reporting systems worldwide.

DOI: 10.1177/1460458219889798
PMID: 31820664