48. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2017 Jul 26;2017:473-482. eCollection 2017.

Triangulating Methodologies from Software, Medicine and Human Factors Industries 
to Measure Usability and Clinical Efficacy of Medication Data Visualization in 
an Electronic Health Record System.

Chang B(1), Kanagaraj M(1), Neely B(2), Segall N(1), Huang E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(2)Duke University Health System Division of Translational Bioinformatics, 
Durham, NC.

Within the last decade, use of Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems has become 
intimately integrated into healthcare practice in the United States. However, 
large gaps remain in the study of clinical usability and require rigorous and 
innovative approaches for testing usability principles. In this study, validated 
tools from the core functions that EHRs serve-software, medicine and human 
factors-were combined to holistically understand and objectively measure 
usability of medication data displays. The first phase of this study included 
132 medical trainee participants who were randomized to one of two simulated EHR 
environments with either a medication list or a medication timeline 
visualization. Within these environments human-computer interaction metrics, 
clinical reasoning and situation awareness tests, and usability surveys captured 
their multi-faceted interactions. Results showed no statistically significant 
differences in the two displays from software and situation awareness 
perspectives, though there were higher statistically significant usability 
scores of the medication timeline (intervention) as compared to the medication 
list (control). This first phase of a novel design in triangulating 
methodologies revealed several limitations from which future experiments will be 
adjusted with hopes of yielding further insight and a generalizable testing 
platform for evolving EHR interfaces.

PMCID: PMC5543381
PMID: 28815147