415. Secur Inform. 2014;3(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s13388-014-0004-6. Epub 2014 Sep 3.

Using publicly visible social media to build detailed forecasts of civil unrest.

Compton R(1), Lee C(1), Xu J(1), Artieda-Moncada L(1), Lu TC(1), Silva L(2), 
Macy M(3).

Author information:
(1)Information and System Sciences Laboratory, HRL Laboratories, 3011 Malibu 
Canyon Road, Malibu, 90265 CA USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah USA.
(3)Social Dynamics Laboratory, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York USA.

We demonstrate how one can generate predictions for several thousand incidents 
of Latin American civil unrest, often many days in advance, by surfacing 
informative public posts available on Twitter and Tumblr. The data mining system 
presented here runs daily and requires no manual intervention. Identification of 
informative posts is accomplished by applying multiple textual and geographic 
filters to a high-volume data feed consisting of tens of millions of posts per 
day which have been flagged as public by their authors. Predictions are built by 
annotating the filtered posts, typically a few dozen per day, with demographic, 
spatial, and temporal information. Key to our textual filters is the fact that 
social media posts are necessarily short, making it possible to easily infer 
topic by simply searching for comentions of typically unrelated terms within the 
same post (e.g. a future date comentioned with an unrest keyword). Additional 
textual filters then proceed by applying a logistic regression classifier 
trained to recognize accounts belonging to organizations who are likely to 
announce civil unrest. Geographic filtering is accomplished despite sparsely 
available GPS information and without relying on sophisticated natural language 
processing. A geocoding technique which infers non-GPS-known user locations via 
the locations of their GPS-known friends provides us with location estimates for 
91,984,163 Twitter users at a median error of 6.65km. We show that announcements 
of upcoming events tend to localize within a small geographic region, allowing 
us to forecast event locations which are not explicitly mentioned in text. We 
annotate our forecasts with demographic information by searching the collected 
posts for demographic specific keywords generated by hand as well as with the 
aid of DBpedia. Our system has been in production since December 2012 and, at 
the time of this writing, has produced 4,771 distinct forecasts for events 
across ten Latin American nations. Manual examination of 2,859 posts surfaced by 
our method revealed that only 108 were discussing topics unrelated to civil 
unrest. Examination of 2,596 forecasts generated between 2013-07-01 and 
2013-11-30 found 1,192 (45.9%) matched exactly the date and within a 100 km 
radius of a civil unrest event reported in traditional news media.

DOI: 10.1186/s13388-014-0004-6
PMCID: PMC4643851
PMID: 26594609