83. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2017 Jun;10(3):313-321. doi: 10.1007/s12265-017-9752-2. 
Epub 2017 Jun 5.

Text Mining of the Electronic Health Record: An Information Extraction Approach 
for Automated Identification and Subphenotyping of HFpEF Patients for Clinical 
Trials.

Jonnalagadda SR(1)(2), Adupa AK(3), Garg RP(3), Corona-Cox J(4), Shah SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Health and Biomedical Informatics, Department of Preventive 
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 
60611, USA. sidjreddy@gmail.com.
(2)Microsoft Corporation, 555 110th Ave NE, Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA. 
sidjreddy@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Health and Biomedical Informatics, Department of Preventive 
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 
60611, USA.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.

Precision medicine requires clinical trials that are able to efficiently enroll 
subtypes of patients in whom targeted therapies can be tested. To reduce the 
large amount of time spent screening, identifying, and recruiting patients with 
specific subtypes of heterogeneous clinical syndromes (such as heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction [HFpEF]), we need prescreening systems that are 
able to automate data extraction and decision-making tasks. However, a major 
obstacle is the vast amount of unstructured free-form text in medical records. 
Here we describe an information extraction-based approach that automatically 
converts unstructured text into structured data, which is cross-referenced 
against eligibility criteria using a rule-based system to determine which 
patients qualify for a major HFpEF clinical trial (PARAGON). We show that we can 
achieve a sensitivity and positive predictive value of 0.95 and 0.86, 
respectively. Our open-source algorithm could be used to efficiently identify 
and subphenotype patients with HFpEF and other disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s12265-017-9752-2
PMID: 28585184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]