426. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 24;9(10):e108396. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108396. 
eCollection 2014.

Anatomical entity recognition with a hierarchical framework augmented by 
external resources.

Xu Y(1), Hua J(2), Ni Z(2), Chen Q(2), Fan Y(2), Ananiadou S(3), Chang EI(4), 
Tsujii J(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Key Laboratory of 
Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Ministry of Education, Beihang University, 
Beijing, China; Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Key Laboratory of 
Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Ministry of Education, Beihang University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)The National Centre for Text Mining, School of Computer Science, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China.

References to anatomical entities in medical records consist not only of 
explicit references to anatomical locations, but also other diverse types of 
expressions, such as specific diseases, clinical tests, clinical treatments, 
which constitute implicit references to anatomical entities. In order to 
identify these implicit anatomical entities, we propose a hierarchical 
framework, in which two layers of named entity recognizers (NERs) work in a 
cooperative manner. Each of the NERs is implemented using the Conditional Random 
Fields (CRF) model, which use a range of external resources to generate 
features. We constructed a dictionary of anatomical entity expressions by 
exploiting four existing resources, i.e., UMLS, MeSH, RadLex and BodyPart3D, and 
supplemented information from two external knowledge bases, i.e., Wikipedia and 
WordNet, to improve inference of anatomical entities from implicit expressions. 
Experiments conducted on 300 discharge summaries showed a micro-averaged 
performance of 0.8509 Precision, 0.7796 Recall and 0.8137 F1 for explicit 
anatomical entity recognition, and 0.8695 Precision, 0.6893 Recall and 0.7690 F1 
for implicit anatomical entity recognition. The use of the hierarchical 
framework, which combines the recognition of named entities of various types 
(diseases, clinical tests, treatments) with information embedded in external 
knowledge bases, resulted in a 5.08% increment in F1. The resources constructed 
for this research will be made publicly available.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108396
PMCID: PMC4208750
PMID: 25343498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Funding was received from 
Microsoft Research Asia, but is not accompanied by any other relevant 
declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in 
development or marketed products and does not alter the authors' adherence to 
all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.