576. JMIR Res Protoc. 2018 Sep 6;7(9):e10871. doi: 10.2196/10871.

Individualized Clinical Practice Guidelines for Pressure Injury Management: 
Development of an Integrated Multi-Modal Biomedical Information Resource.

Bogie KM(1)(2), Zhang GQ(3)(4), Roggenkamp SK(3)(4), Zeng N(3)(4), Seton J(1), 
Tao S(3)(4), Bloostein AL(5), Sun J(5).

Author information:
(1)Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, United States.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 
United States.
(3)Institute for Biomedical Informatics, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 
United States.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United 
States.
(5)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States.

BACKGROUND: Pressure ulcers (PU) and deep tissue injuries (DTI), collectively 
known as pressure injuries are serious complications causing staggering costs 
and human suffering with over 200 reported risk factors from many domains. 
Primary pressure injury prevention seeks to prevent the first incidence, while 
secondary PU/DTI prevention aims to decrease chronic recurrence. Clinical 
practice guidelines (CPG) combine evidence-based practice and expert opinion to 
aid clinicians in the goal of achieving best practices for primary and secondary 
prevention. The correction of all risk factors can be both overwhelming and 
impractical to implement in clinical practice. There is a need to develop 
practical clinical tools to prioritize the multiple recommendations of CPG, but 
there is limited guidance on how to prioritize based on individual cases. 
Bioinformatics platforms enable data management to support clinical decision 
support and user-interface development for complex clinical challenges such as 
pressure injury prevention care planning.
OBJECTIVE: The central hypothesis of the study is that the individual's risk 
factor profile can provide the basis for adaptive, personalized care planning 
for PU prevention based on CPG prioritization. The study objective is to develop 
the Spinal Cord Injury Pressure Ulcer and Deep Tissue Injury (SCIPUD+) Resource 
to support personalized care planning for primary and secondary PU/DTI 
prevention.
METHODS: The study is employing a retrospective electronic health record (EHR) 
chart review of over 75 factors known to be relevant for pressure injury risk in 
individuals with a spinal cord injury (SCI) and routinely recorded in the EHR. 
We also perform tissue health assessments of a selected sub-group. A systems 
approach is being used to develop and validate the SCIPUD+ Resource 
incorporating the many risk factor domains associated with PU/DTI primary and 
secondary prevention, ranging from the individual's environment to local tissue 
health. Our multiscale approach will leverage the strength of bioinformatics 
applied to an established national EHR system. A comprehensive model is being 
used to relate the primary outcome of interest (PU/DTI development) with over 75 
PU/DTI risk factors using a retrospective chart review of 5000 individuals 
selected from the study cohort of more than 36,000 persons with SCI. A Spinal 
Cord Injury Pressure Ulcer and Deep Tissue Injury Ontology (SCIPUDO) is being 
developed to enable robust text-mining for data extraction from free-form notes.
RESULTS: The results from this study are pending.
CONCLUSIONS: PU/DTI remains a highly significant source of morbidity for 
individuals with SCI. Personalized interactive care plans may decrease both 
initial PU formation and readmission rates for high-risk individuals. The 
project is using established EHR data to build a comprehensive, structured model 
of environmental, social and clinical pressure injury risk factors. The 
comprehensive SCIPUD+ health care tool will be used to relate the primary 
outcome of interest (pressure injury development) with covariates including 
environmental, social, clinical, personal and tissue health profiles as well as 
possible interactions among some of these covariates. The study will result in a 
validated tool for personalized implementation of CPG recommendations and has 
great potential to change the standard of care for PrI clinical practice by 
enabling clinicians to provide personalized application of CPG priorities 
tailored to the needs of each at-risk individual with SCI.
REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER: RR1-10.2196/10871.

Â©Kath M Bogie, Guo-Qiang Zhang, Steven K Roggenkamp, Ningzhou Zeng, Jacinta 
Seton, Shiqiang Tao, Arielle L Bloostein, Jiayang Sun. Originally published in 
JMIR Research Protocols (http://www.researchprotocols.org), 06.09.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/10871
PMCID: PMC6231753
PMID: 30190252

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.