53. Biomed Res Int. 2018 Mar 20;2018:6217812. doi: 10.1155/2018/6217812. eCollection 
2018.

How Artificial Intelligence Can Improve Our Understanding of the Genes 
Associated with Endometriosis: Natural Language Processing of the PubMed 
Database.

Bouaziz J(1)(2), Mashiach R(1), Cohen S(1), Kedem A(1), Baron A(1), Zajicek 
M(1), Feldman I(2)(3), Seidman D(1), Soriano D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Chaim Sheba Medical Center, 
Ramat Gan, Israel.
(2)Artichoc Institue, 5 Alkalay, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Ichilov Hospital, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Endometriosis is a disease characterized by the development of endometrial 
tissue outside the uterus, but its cause remains largely unknown. Numerous genes 
have been studied and proposed to help explain its pathogenesis. However, the 
large number of these candidate genes has made functional validation through 
experimental methodologies nearly impossible. Computational methods could 
provide a useful alternative for prioritizing those most likely to be 
susceptibility genes. Using artificial intelligence applied to text mining, this 
study analyzed the genes involved in the pathogenesis, development, and 
progression of endometriosis. The data extraction by text mining of the 
endometriosis-related genes in the PubMed database was based on natural language 
processing, and the data were filtered to remove false positives. Using data 
from the text mining and gene network information as input for the web-based 
tool, 15,207 endometriosis-related genes were ranked according to their score in 
the database. Characterization of the filtered gene set through gene ontology, 
pathway, and network analysis provided information about the numerous mechanisms 
hypothesized to be responsible for the establishment of ectopic endometrial 
tissue, as well as the migration, implantation, survival, and proliferation of 
ectopic endometrial cells. Finally, the human genome was scanned through various 
databases using filtered genes as a seed to determine novel genes that might 
also be involved in the pathogenesis of endometriosis but which have not yet 
been characterized. These genes could be promising candidates to serve as useful 
diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets in the management of 
endometriosis.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/6217812
PMCID: PMC5884286
PMID: 29750165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]