615. J Med Internet Res. 2019 Jul 8;21(7):e12443. doi: 10.2196/12443.

Identifying Key Target Audiences for Public Health Campaigns: Leveraging Machine 
Learning in the Case of Hookah Tobacco Smoking.

Chu KH(#)(1), Colditz J(#)(1), Malik M(#)(2), Yates T(#)(1), Primack B(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(2)Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Hookah tobacco smoking (HTS) is a particularly important issue for 
public health professionals to address owing to its prevalence and deleterious 
health effects. Social media sites can be a valuable tool for public health 
officials to conduct informational health campaigns. Current social media 
platforms provide researchers with opportunities to better identify and target 
specific audiences and even individuals. However, we are not aware of systematic 
research attempting to identify audiences with mixed or ambivalent views toward 
HTS.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to (1) confirm previous research 
showing positively skewed HTS sentiment on Twitter using a larger dataset by 
leveraging machine learning techniques and (2) systematically identify 
individuals who exhibit mixed opinions about HTS via the Twitter platform and 
therefore represent key audiences for intervention.
METHODS: We prospectively collected tweets related to HTS from January to June 
2016. We double-coded sentiment for a subset of approximately 5000 randomly 
sampled tweets for sentiment toward HTS and used these data to train a machine 
learning classifier to assess the remaining approximately 556,000 HTS-related 
Twitter posts. Natural language processing software was used to extract 
linguistic features (ie, language-based covariates). The data were processed by 
machine learning tools and algorithms using R. Finally, we used the results to 
identify individuals who, because they had consistently posted both positive and 
negative content, might be ambivalent toward HTS and represent an ideal audience 
for intervention.
RESULTS: There were 561,960 HTS-related tweets: 373,911 were classified as 
positive and 183,139 were classified as negative. A set of 12,861 users met a 
priori criteria indicating that they posted both positive and negative tweets 
about HTS.
CONCLUSIONS: Sentiment analysis can allow researchers to identify audience 
segments on social media that demonstrate ambiguity toward key public health 
issues, such as HTS, and therefore represent ideal populations for intervention. 
Using large social media datasets can help public health officials to 
preemptively identify specific audience segments that would be most receptive to 
targeted campaigns.

Â©Kar-Hai Chu, Jason Colditz, Momin Malik, Tabitha Yates, Brian Primack. 
Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research 
(http://www.jmir.org), 08.07.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/12443
PMCID: PMC6643764
PMID: 31287063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.