397. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 23;10(1):12365. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-68649-0.

MAGPEL: an autoMated pipeline for inferring vAriant-driven Gene PanEls from the 
full-length biomedical literature.

Saberian N(1), Shafi A(1), Peyvandipour A(1), Draghici S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA. 
Sorin@wayne.edu.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 
USA. Sorin@wayne.edu.

In spite of the efforts in developing and maintaining accurate variant 
databases, a large number of disease-associated variants are still hidden in the 
biomedical literature. Curation of the biomedical literature in an effort to 
extract this information is a challenging task due to: (i) the complexity of 
natural language processing, (ii) inconsistent use of standard recommendations 
for variant description, and (iii) the lack of clarity and consistency in 
describing the variant-genotype-phenotype associations in the biomedical 
literature. In this article, we employ text mining and word cloud analysis 
techniques to address these challenges. The proposed framework extracts the 
variant-gene-disease associations from the full-length biomedical literature and 
designs an evidence-based variant-driven gene panel for a given condition. We 
validate the identified genes by showing their diagnostic abilities to predict 
the patients' clinical outcome on several independent validation cohorts. As 
representative examples, we present our results for acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML), breast cancer and prostate cancer. We compare these panels with other 
variant-driven gene panels obtained from Clinvar, Mastermind and others from 
literature, as well as with a panel identified with a classical differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) approach. The results show that the panels obtained by 
the proposed framework yield better results than the other gene panels currently 
available in the literature.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-68649-0
PMCID: PMC7378213
PMID: 32703994

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.