486. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Nov 19;9 Suppl 11(Suppl 11):S2. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-9-S11-S2.

All-paths graph kernel for protein-protein interaction extraction with 
evaluation of cross-corpus learning.

Airola A(1), Pyysalo S, Bj√∂rne J, Pahikkala T, Ginter F, Salakoski T.

Author information:
(1)Turku Centre for Computer Science (TUCS) and the Department of IT, University 
of Turku, Joukahaisenkatu 3-5, 20520 Turku, Finland. antti.airola@utu.fi

BACKGROUND: Automated extraction of protein-protein interactions (PPI) is an 
important and widely studied task in biomedical text mining. We propose a graph 
kernel based approach for this task. In contrast to earlier approaches to PPI 
extraction, the introduced all-paths graph kernel has the capability to make use 
of full, general dependency graphs representing the sentence structure.
RESULTS: We evaluate the proposed method on five publicly available PPI corpora, 
providing the most comprehensive evaluation done for a machine learning based 
PPI-extraction system. We additionally perform a detailed evaluation of the 
effects of training and testing on different resources, providing insight into 
the challenges involved in applying a system beyond the data it was trained on. 
Our method is shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance with respect to 
comparable evaluations, with 56.4 F-score and 84.8 AUC on the AImed corpus.
CONCLUSION: We show that the graph kernel approach performs on state-of-the-art 
level in PPI extraction, and note the possible extension to the task of 
extracting complex interactions. Cross-corpus results provide further insight 
into how the learning generalizes beyond individual corpora. Further, we 
identify several pitfalls that can make evaluations of PPI-extraction systems 
incomparable, or even invalid. These include incorrect cross-validation 
strategies and problems related to comparing F-score results achieved on 
different evaluation resources. Recommendations for avoiding these pitfalls are 
provided.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-S11-S2
PMCID: PMC2586751
PMID: 19025688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]