526. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2004 Jun;2(2):375-411. doi: 10.1142/s0219720004000648.

Techniques for optimization of queries on integrated biological resources.

Lacroix Z(1), Raschid L, Eckman BA.

Author information:
(1)Arizona State University, PO Box 876106, Tempe, Arizona 85287-6106, USA. 
zoe.lacroix@asu.edu

Today, scientific data are inevitably digitized, stored in a wide variety of 
formats, and are accessible over the Internet. Scientific discovery increasingly 
involves accessing multiple heterogeneous data sources, integrating the results 
of complex queries, and applying further analysis and visualization applications 
in order to collect datasets of interest. Building a scientific integration 
platform to support these critical tasks requires accessing and manipulating 
data extracted from flat files or databases, documents retrieved from the Web, 
as well as data that are locally materialized in warehouses or generated by 
software. The lack of efficiency of existing approaches can significantly affect 
the process with lengthy delays while accessing critical resources or with the 
failure of the system to report any results. Some queries take so much time to 
be answered that their results are returned via email, making their integration 
with other results a tedious task. This paper presents several issues that need 
to be addressed to provide seamless and efficient integration of biomolecular 
data. Identified challenges include: capturing and representing various domain 
specific computational capabilities supported by a source including sequence or 
text search engines and traditional query processing; developing a methodology 
to acquire and represent semantic knowledge and metadata about source contents, 
overlap in source contents, and access costs; developing cost and semantics 
based decision support tools to select sources and capabilities, and to generate 
efficient query evaluation plans.

DOI: 10.1142/s0219720004000648
PMID: 15297988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]