459. J Clin Monit Comput. 2010 Feb;24(1):51-60. doi: 10.1007/s10877-009-9209-5. Epub 
2009 Nov 7.

The anaesthetic report: custom-made printouts from 
anaesthesia-information-management-systems using extensible stylesheet language 
transformation.

Meyer-Bender A(1), Spitz R, Pollwein B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, University Hospital of Munich-Campus 
Grosshadern, Germany. Andreas.Meyer-Bender@med.uni-muenchen.de

OBJECTIVE: Today many anaesthetic departments use electronic 
Anaesthesia-Information-Management-Systems (AIMS). Although these systems retain 
clinical information electronically, a printed report is still essential for a 
systematic patient-handover and as a part of the patient's records. As the 
printouts produced by common AIMS usually do not fit in the department's 
document system, we searched for a method to generate our own automatic 
anaesthetic reports.
METHODS: As the AIMS we use provides all data in XML-format (Extensible Markup 
Language), we designed a postoperative report using Extensible Stylesheet 
Language-Transformation (XSLT). The result was encouraging enough to develop 
further applications for this platform. These are demonstrated in the present 
paper.
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: XSLT proved to be a very satisfactory technique to create 
different printouts and is therefore a feasible technique to enhance any AIMS. 
As XML turns out to be one of the most important formats for medical data, we 
call for the development of an international anaesthetic XML-standard and its 
adoption to AIMS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10877-009-9209-5
PMID: 19898945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]