320. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Jun 23. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1966. Online ahead of print.

An Electronic Health Record Text Mining Tool to Collect Real-World Drug 
Treatment Outcomes: A Validation Study in Patients With Metastatic Renal Cell 
Carcinoma.

van Laar SA(1), Gombert-Handoko KB(1), Guchelaar HJ(1), Zwaveling J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Real-world evidence can close the inferential gap between marketing 
authorization studies and clinical practice. However, the current standard for 
real-world data extraction from electronic health records (EHRs) for treatment 
evaluation is manual review (MR), which is time-consuming and laborious. 
Clinical Data Collector (CDC) is a novel natural language processing and text 
mining software tool for both structured and unstructured EHR data and only 
shows relevant EHR sections improving efficiency. We investigated CDC as a 
real-world data (RWD) collection method, through application of CDC queries for 
patient inclusion and information extraction on a cohort of patients with 
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) receiving systemic drug treatment. 
Baseline patient characteristics, disease characteristics, and treatment 
outcomes were extracted and these were compared with MR for validation. One 
hundred patients receiving 175 treatments were included using CDC, which 
corresponded to 99% with MR. Calculated median overall survival was 21.7 months 
(95% confidence interval (CI) 18.7-24.8) vs. 21.7 months (95% CI 18.6-24.8) and 
progression-free survival 8.9 months (95% CI 5.4-12.4) vs. 7.6 months (95% CI 
5.7-9.4) for CDC vs. MR, respectively. Highest F1-score was found for 
cancer-related variables (88.1-100), followed by comorbidities (71.5-90.4) and 
adverse drug events (53.3-74.5), with most diverse scores on international 
metastatic RCC database criteria (51.4-100). Mean data collection time was 
12 minutes (CDC) vs. 86 minutes (MR). In conclusion, CDC is a promising tool for 
retrieving RWD from EHRs because the correct patient population can be 
identified as well as relevant outcome data, such as overall survival and 
progression-free survival.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.1966
PMID: 32575147