173. J Biomed Semantics. 2011 May 17;2 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S10. doi: 
10.1186/2041-1480-2-S2-S10.

Integration and publication of heterogeneous text-mined relationships on the 
Semantic Web.

Coulet A(1), Garten Y, Dumontier M, Altman RB, Musen MA, Shah NH.

Author information:
(1)LORIA - INRIA Nancy - Grand-Est, Campus Scientifique - BP 239 - 54506 
Vandoeuvre-l√®s-Nancy Cedex, France. adrien.coulet@loria.fr.

BACKGROUND: Advances in Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques enable the 
extraction of fine-grained relationships mentioned in biomedical text. The 
variability and the complexity of natural language in expressing similar 
relationships causes the extracted relationships to be highly heterogeneous, 
which makes the construction of knowledge bases difficult and poses a challenge 
in using these for data mining or question answering.
RESULTS: We report on the semi-automatic construction of the PHARE relationship 
ontology (the PHArmacogenomic RElationships Ontology) consisting of 200 curated 
relations from over 40,000 heterogeneous relationships extracted via 
text-mining. These heterogeneous relations are then mapped to the PHARE ontology 
using synonyms, entity descriptions and hierarchies of entities and roles. Once 
mapped, relationships can be normalized and compared using the structure of the 
ontology to identify relationships that have similar semantics but different 
syntax. We compare and contrast the manual procedure with a fully automated 
approach using WordNet to quantify the degree of integration enabled by 
iterative curation and refinement of the PHARE ontology. The result of such 
integration is a repository of normalized biomedical relationships, named 
PHARE-KB, which can be queried using Semantic Web technologies such as SPARQL 
and can be visualized in the form of a biological network.
CONCLUSIONS: The PHARE ontology serves as a common semantic framework to 
integrate more than 40,000 relationships pertinent to pharmacogenomics. The 
PHARE ontology forms the foundation of a knowledge base named PHARE-KB. Once 
populated with relationships, PHARE-KB (i) can be visualized in the form of a 
biological network to guide human tasks such as database curation and (ii) can 
be queried programmatically to guide bioinformatics applications such as the 
prediction of molecular interactions. PHARE is available at 
http://purl.bioontology.org/ontology/PHARE.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-2-S2-S10
PMCID: PMC3102890
PMID: 21624156