354. IHI. 2010;2010:240-249. doi: 10.1145/1882992.1883026.

Using Electronic Health Record Systems in Diabetes Care: Emerging Practices.

Veinot TC, Zheng K, Lowery JC, Souden M, Keith R.

While there has been considerable attention devoted to the deployment of 
electronic health record (EHR) systems, there has been far less attention given 
to their appropriation for use in clinical encounters - particularly in the 
context of complex, chronic illness. The Department of Veterans' Affairs (VA) 
has been at the forefront of EHR adoption and, as such, provides a unique 
opportunity to examine a mature EHR system in widespread use. Moreover, with a 
high prevalence of diabetes in its patient population, the VA provides a useful 
platform for examining EHR use in the context of chronic disease care. We 
conducted a sequential, exploratory qualitative study at two VA Medical Centers 
in the Midwest. First, we conducted observations of 64 clinical consultations 
with diabetes patients. These observations involved 31 different health care 
providers. Second, using insights from these observations, we conducted 
in-depth, semi-structured interviews with 39 health care providers focusing on 
their use of information in diabetes patient care. Field notes and interview 
transcripts were analyzed using a grounded theory approach. Our analysis 
generated several categories of EHR use in clinical encounters: priming, 
structuring, assessing, informing, and continuing. We also outline some 
mismatches between EHR system design and VA diabetes care practices. We conclude 
by discussing implications of these emergent system uses for improving the 
software design of EHRs to better support chronic disease care, as well as for 
our understanding of the integration of technologies in health care.

DOI: 10.1145/1882992.1883026
PMCID: PMC4175736
PMID: 25264545