293. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2010 Sep 20;66(9):1229-36. doi: 
10.6009/jjrt.66.1229.

[Development of the method for the similarity detection of descriptions in 
radiology reports using structuring technology].

[Article in Japanese]

Futami H(1), Yamagishi H, Kawaguchi O, Tsukamoto N, Fujii H, Kasamatsu T, Ando 
Y, Osada M, Kubo A.

Author information:
(1)System Integration Division, Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation.

Radiologists often spend much time for re-reading some of the past free-text 
radiology reports and determining interval changes in the physical findings when 
creating a report for long term cases. The aim of this study was to propose the 
method to detect semantic similar descriptions in the free-text reports using 
the structuring method based on text-mining technology. In a previous study, we 
had developed the structuring method that can semantically analyze the free-text 
reports and convert them into the description unit consisting of five items: 
finding/diagnosis, modifier, region, regional modifier, and confidence. Our 
developed prototype system extracted similar descriptions from the free-text 
reports by calculating the similarity index between description units. We 
confirmed similar descriptions extracted by the system applied to free-text 
reports of cases which had more than one chest CT examination written in actual 
clinical situation. As a result, it became available to identify candidates of 
similar descriptions from free-text reports. In some cases regarding practical 
use, the similar descriptions could not be identified in the sentences which 
used paraphrasing or where the findings had status changes. A solution of 
identifying similarity in these cases was necessary to improve the method. With 
the presented method here, it is expected that interval changes in the findings 
can be visualized and applied it to support diagnosis.

DOI: 10.6009/jjrt.66.1229
PMID: 20975244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]