200. Mol Inform. 2014 May;33(5):332-42. doi: 10.1002/minf.201300144. Epub 2014 May 
12.

Mining Molecular Pharmacological Effects from Biomedical Text: a Case Study for 
Eliciting Anti-Obesity/Diabetes Effects of Chemical Compounds.

Dura E(1), Muresan S(2), Engkvist O(2), Blomberg N(2)(3), Chen H(4).

Author information:
(1)Lexware Labs Ltd, SE-41319 Göteborg, Sweden. elzbieta@lexwarelabs.com.
(2)Computational Chemistry, Chemistry Innovation Centre, Discovery Sciences, 
AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, SE-43183 Mölndal, Sweden.
(3)Current address: ELIXIR Hub, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European 
Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 
1SD, UK.
(4)Computational Chemistry, Chemistry Innovation Centre, Discovery Sciences, 
AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, SE-43183 Mölndal, Sweden. 
hongming.chen@astrazeneca.com.

In the pharmaceutical industry, efficiently mining pharmacological data from the 
rapidly increasing scientific literature is very crucial for many aspects of the 
drug discovery process such as target validation, tool compound selection etc. A 
quick and reliable way is needed to collect literature assertions of selected 
compounds' biological and pharmacological effects in order to assist the 
hypothesis generation and decision-making of drug developers. INFUSIS, the text 
mining system presented here, extracts data on chemical compounds from PubMed 
abstracts. It involves an extensive use of customized natural language 
processing besides a co-occurrence analysis. As a proof-of-concept study, 
INFUSIS was used to search in abstract texts for several obesity/diabetes 
related pharmacological effects of the compounds included in a compound 
dictionary. The system extracts assertions regarding the pharmacological effects 
of each given compound and scores them by the relevance. For each selected 
pharmacological effect, the highest scoring assertions in 100 abstracts were 
manually evaluated, i.e. 800 abstracts in total. The overall accuracy for the 
inferred assertions was over 90 percent.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/minf.201300144
PMID: 27485890