253. Bioinformatics. 2016 Dec 1;32(23):3635-3644. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw529. 
Epub 2016 Aug 16.

Corpus domain effects on distributional semantic modeling of medical terms.

Pakhomov SV(1)(2), Finley G(2), McEwan R(2), Wang Y(2), Melton GB(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(2)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 
55455, USA.

MOTIVATION: Automatically quantifying semantic similarity and relatedness 
between clinical terms is an important aspect of text mining from electronic 
health records, which are increasingly recognized as valuable sources of 
phenotypic information for clinical genomics and bioinformatics research. A key 
obstacle to development of semantic relatedness measures is the limited 
availability of large quantities of clinical text to researchers and developers 
outside of major medical centers. Text from general English and biomedical 
literature are freely available; however, their validity as a substitute for 
clinical domain to represent semantics of clinical terms remains to be 
demonstrated.
RESULTS: We constructed neural network representations of clinical terms found 
in a publicly available benchmark dataset manually labeled for semantic 
similarity and relatedness. Similarity and relatedness measures computed from 
text corpora in three domains (Clinical Notes, PubMed Central articles and 
Wikipedia) were compared using the benchmark as reference. We found that 
measures computed from full text of biomedical articles in PubMed Central 
repository (rho = 0.62 for similarity and 0.58 for relatedness) are on par with 
measures computed from clinical reports (rho = 0.60 for similarity and 0.57 for 
relatedness). We also evaluated the use of neural network based relatedness 
measures for query expansion in a clinical document retrieval task and a 
biomedical term word sense disambiguation task. We found that, with some 
limitations, biomedical articles may be used in lieu of clinical reports to 
represent the semantics of clinical terms and that distributional semantic 
methods are useful for clinical and biomedical natural language processing 
applications.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The software and reference standards used in 
this study to evaluate semantic similarity and relatedness measures are publicly 
available as detailed in the article.
CONTACT: pakh0002@umn.eduSupplementary information: Supplementary data are 
available at Bioinformatics online.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw529
PMCID: PMC5181540
PMID: 27531100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]