211. J Biomed Inform. 2010 Dec;43(6):953-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2010.08.003. Epub 
2010 Aug 13.

Detecting hedge cues and their scope in biomedical text with conditional random 
fields.

Agarwal S(1), Yu H.

Author information:
(1)Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Hedging is frequently used in both the biological literature and 
clinical notes to denote uncertainty or speculation. It is important for 
text-mining applications to detect hedge cues and their scope; otherwise, 
uncertain events are incorrectly identified as factual events. However, due to 
the complexity of language, identifying hedge cues and their scope in a sentence 
is not a trivial task. Our objective was to develop an algorithm that would 
automatically detect hedge cues and their scope in biomedical literature.
METHODOLOGY: We used conditional random fields (CRFs), a supervised 
machine-learning algorithm, to train models to detect hedge cue phrases and 
their scope in biomedical literature. The models were trained on the publicly 
available BioScope corpus. We evaluated the performance of the CRF models in 
identifying hedge cue phrases and their scope by calculating recall, precision 
and F1-score. We compared our models with three competitive baseline systems.
RESULTS: Our best CRF-based model performed statistically better than the 
baseline systems, achieving an F1-score of 88% and 86% in detecting hedge cue 
phrases and their scope in biological literature and an F1-score of 93% and 90% 
in detecting hedge cue phrases and their scope in clinical notes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our approach is robust, as it can identify hedge cues and their 
scope in both biological and clinical text. To benefit text-mining applications, 
our system is publicly available as a Java API and as an online application at 
http://hedgescope.askhermes.org. To our knowledge, this is the first publicly 
available system to detect hedge cues and their scope in biomedical literature.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2010.08.003
PMCID: PMC2991497
PMID: 20709188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]