308. J Digit Imaging. 2020 Jun 3. doi: 10.1007/s10278-020-00350-0. Online ahead of 
print.

A Scalable Natural Language Processing for Inferring BT-RADS Categorization from 
Unstructured Brain Magnetic Resonance Reports.

Lee SJ(1), Weinberg BD(1), Gore A(1), Banerjee I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Emory University School of 
Medicine, 1364 Clifton Road NE, Suite D112, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Woodruff Memorial Research Building, Office 4103, 101 Woodruff Circle, 4th Floor 
East, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA. imon.banerjee@emory.edu.

The aim of this study is to develop an automated classification method for Brain 
Tumor Reporting and Data System (BT-RADS) categories from unstructured and 
structured brain magnetic resonance imaging (MR) reports. This retrospective 
study included 1410 BT-RADS structured reports dated from January 2014 to 
December 2017 and a test set of 109 unstructured brain MR reports dated from 
January 2010 to December 2014. Text vector representations and semantic word 
embeddings were generated from individual report sections (i.e., "History," 
"Findings," etc.) using Tf-idf statistics and a fine-tuned word2vec model, 
respectively. Section-wise ensemble models were trained using gradient boosting 
(XGBoost), elastic net regularization, and random forests, and classification 
accuracy was evaluated on an independent test set of unstructured brain MR 
reports and a validation set of BT-RADS structured reports. Section-wise 
ensemble models using XGBoost and word2vec semantic word embeddings were more 
accurate than those using Tf-idf statistics when classifying unstructured 
reports, with an f1 score of 0.72. In contrast, models using traditional Tf-idf 
statistics outperformed the word2vec semantic approach for categorization from 
structured reports, with an f1 score of 0.98. Proposed natural language 
processing pipeline is capable of inferring BT-RADS report scores from 
unstructured reports after training on structured report data. Our study 
provides a detailed experimentation process and may provide guidance for the 
development of RADS-focused information extraction (IE) applications from 
structured and unstructured radiology reports.

DOI: 10.1007/s10278-020-00350-0
PMID: 32495125