470. Work. 2020;65(1):187-194. doi: 10.3233/WOR-193048.

Contributions of activity ergonomics to the design of an electronic health 
record to support collaborative mental care of children and youth: Preliminary 
results.

do Carmo Alonso CM(1), de Lima AN(2), Oggioni BMP(2), Teixeira MR(3), Oliveira 
EP(1), Couto MCV(3), Duarte FJCM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational Therapy, Medical School, UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(2)Production Engineering Program, COPPE, UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Research Group on Public Mental Health Policies, Institute of Psychiatry, 
UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The use of electronic health records (EHR) is related to the 
improvement of service quality and care coordination. The design of this 
platform generally focuses on the individual use of the system and does not 
integrate the specific needs of workers to provide support for collaborative 
activities.
OBJECTIVE: The study investigated how activity ergonomics (AE) contributed to 
improve the design of an EHR that supports the collaborative mental health care 
of children and youth.
METHODS: This qualitative study, based on the theoretical framework of AE, used 
individual and group interviews and document analysis as research procedures. 
The data collection occurred between March and September 2017 in Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
RESULTS: The study highlighted the following points: the characteristics that 
marked the different perceptions of workers regarding the use of a communication 
tool for collaborative care; the problems related to spreadsheet usability; and 
the desirable attributes that should be considered in the conception of a new 
EHR.
CONCLUSIONS: The research indicated that AE favors improving the design of an 
EHR by incorporating the work dimension into the project.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-193048
PMID: 31868702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]