128. J Biomed Inform. 2009 Aug;42(4):710-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2009.04.002. Epub 
2009 Apr 22.

@Note: a workbench for biomedical text mining.

Lourenço A(1), Carreira R, Carneiro S, Maia P, Glez-Peña D, Fdez-Riverola F, 
Ferreira EC, Rocha I, Rocha M.

Author information:
(1)IBB - Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Centre of Biological 
Engineering, University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal. 
analia@deb.uminho.pt

Biomedical Text Mining (BioTM) is providing valuable approaches to the automated 
curation of scientific literature. However, most efforts have addressed the 
benchmarking of new algorithms rather than user operational needs. Bridging the 
gap between BioTM researchers and biologists' needs is crucial to solve 
real-world problems and promote further research. We present @Note, a platform 
for BioTM that aims at the effective translation of the advances between three 
distinct classes of users: biologists, text miners and software developers. Its 
main functional contributions are the ability to process abstracts and 
full-texts; an information retrieval module enabling PubMed search and journal 
crawling; a pre-processing module with PDF-to-text conversion, tokenisation and 
stopword removal; a semantic annotation schema; a lexicon-based annotator; a 
user-friendly annotation view that allows to correct annotations and a Text 
Mining Module supporting dataset preparation and algorithm evaluation. @Note 
improves the interoperability, modularity and flexibility when integrating 
in-home and open-source third-party components. Its component-based architecture 
allows the rapid development of new applications, emphasizing the principles of 
transparency and simplicity of use. Although it is still on-going, it has 
already allowed the development of applications that are currently being used.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2009.04.002
PMID: 19393341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]