80. Comput Math Methods Med. 2015;2015:910423. doi: 10.1155/2015/910423. Epub 2015 
Aug 10.

A Relation Extraction Framework for Biomedical Text Using Hybrid Feature Set.

Muzaffar AW(1), Azam F(1), Qamar U(1).

Author information:
(1)National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), H-12, Islamabad 44000, 
Pakistan.

The information extraction from unstructured text segments is a complex task. 
Although manual information extraction often produces the best results, it is 
harder to manage biomedical data extraction manually because of the exponential 
increase in data size. Thus, there is a need for automatic tools and techniques 
for information extraction in biomedical text mining. Relation extraction is a 
significant area under biomedical information extraction that has gained much 
importance in the last two decades. A lot of work has been done on biomedical 
relation extraction focusing on rule-based and machine learning techniques. In 
the last decade, the focus has changed to hybrid approaches showing better 
results. This research presents a hybrid feature set for classification of 
relations between biomedical entities. The main contribution of this research is 
done in the semantic feature set where verb phrases are ranked using Unified 
Medical Language System (UMLS) and a ranking algorithm. Support Vector Machine 
and Na√Øve Bayes, the two effective machine learning techniques, are used to 
classify these relations. Our approach has been validated on the standard 
biomedical text corpus obtained from MEDLINE 2001. Conclusively, it can be 
articulated that our framework outperforms all state-of-the-art approaches used 
for relation extraction on the same corpus.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/910423
PMCID: PMC4546954
PMID: 26347797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]