583. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2020 Jul 17;20(1):163. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-020-01178-y.

Grand Duchy of Luxembourg: a case study of a national master patient index in 
production since five years.

Vaccaroli R(1), Markus F(2), Danhardt S(2), Zimmermann H(2), Wisniewski F(2), 
Lucas P(2), Barge H(2).

Author information:
(1)Agence eSanté G.I.E., Agence Nationale des informations partagées dans le 
domaine de la santé, 125, route d'Esch, L-1471, Luxembourg, Luxembourg. 
raffaella.VACCAROLI@agence-esante.lu.
(2)Agence eSanté G.I.E., Agence Nationale des informations partagées dans le 
domaine de la santé, 125, route d'Esch, L-1471, Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

BACKGROUND: Unequivocal identification of patients is a precondition for a safe 
medical journey through different information systems (ISs) and software 
applications that are communicating and exchanging interoperable data. A master 
patient index (MPI) can facilitate this task. Being a repository of patient 
identity traits, a MPI allows an accurate surveillance of the patients' "medical 
identities". Up to 2014, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg did not possess a MPI. 
Here, we describe our experience in the establishment of a national MPI for the 
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
METHODS: The different steps that were used to establish the MPI system are 
described. Firstly, through the identification of the suitable application and, 
secondly, through the implementation of the MPI to the eHealth national platform 
and its connection to the national health care system. In parallel to the first 
two phases, the identity management policies were defined and implemented.
RESULTS: Since 2014, when the MPI was integrated to the eHealth platform, we 
observed a continuous increase of identity profiles. At the latest update (31 
December 2018), 2.418.336 identity profiles have been counted, including almost 
the totality of Luxembourgish residents (95.2%) as well as all the cross-border 
workers that are affiliated to the Luxembourgish social security system. An 
analysis of the identification domains connected to the platform highlighted a 
yearly increase in the usage rate of the identities by external applications 
(currently representing 70%). The evaluation of the quality of information 
contained in each identity profile showed low rejection rates (0.2%), indicating 
a high quality and a good level of completeness in regards to the required 
identity traits.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper presents the current state of patient identity 
management in Luxembourg and discusses how this synergistically supports the 
functioning of the national electronic health record (EHR) known as DSP (from 
the French Dossier de Soins Partagé) and the Luxemburgish health care system. 
The here described national MPI has refined the identification of patients, 
leading to an improvement of their safety during their medical journey. 
Nevertheless, the application regularly undergoes updates to better meet the 
current requirements of the Luxembourgish health system.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-020-01178-y
PMCID: PMC7368768
PMID: 32680499

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors are declared employees of the 
government EIG eSanté agency. The national health fund (2/3) and the health 
ministry (1/3) of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg financed this EIG. Maincare 
Solutions may financially benefit from this manuscript as provider of the 
IdeoIdentity application.