371. Comput Intell. 2011 Nov;27(4):681-701. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8640.2011.00405.x.

HIGH-PRECISION BIOLOGICAL EVENT EXTRACTION: EFFECTS OF SYSTEM AND OF DATA.

Cohen KB(1), Verspoor K(1), Johnson HL(1), Roeder C(1), Ogren PV(1), Baumgartner 
WA Jr(1), White E(1), Tipney H(1), Hunter L(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Pharmacology, University of Colorado Denver School 
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.

We approached the problems of event detection, argument identification, and 
negation and speculation detection in the BioNLP'09 information extraction 
challenge through concept recognition and analysis. Our methodology involved 
using the OpenDMAP semantic parser with manually written rules. The original 
OpenDMAP system was updated for this challenge with a broad ontology defined for 
the events of interest, new linguistic patterns for those events, and 
specialized coordination handling. We achieved state-of-the-art precision for 
two of the three tasks, scoring the highest of 24 teams at precision of 71.81 on 
Task 1 and the highest of 6 teams at precision of 70.97 on Task 2. We provide a 
detailed analysis of the training data and show that a number of trigger words 
were ambiguous as to event type, even when their arguments are constrained by 
semantic class. The data is also shown to have a number of missing annotations. 
Analysis of a sampling of the comparatively small number of false positives 
returned by our system shows that major causes of this type of error were 
failing to recognize second themes in two-theme events, failing to recognize 
events when they were the arguments to other events, failure to recognize 
nontheme arguments, and sentence segmentation errors. We show that specifically 
handling coordination had a small but important impact on the overall 
performance of the system. The OpenDMAP system and the rule set are available at 
http://bionlp.sourceforge.net.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8640.2011.00405.x
PMCID: PMC4414063
PMID: 25937701