454. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 2012 Nov;34(11):2216-32. doi: 
10.1109/tpami.2012.20.

Proximity-based frameworks for generating embeddings from multi-output data.

Mu T(1), Goulermas JY, Tsujii J, Ananiadou S.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining (NaCTeM), School of Computer Science, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. tingtingmu@me.com

This paper is about supervised and semi-supervised dimensionality reduction (DR) 
by generating spectral embeddings from multi-output data based on the pairwise 
proximity information. Two flexible and generic frameworks are proposed to 
achieve supervised DR (SDR) for multilabel classification. One is able to extend 
any existing single-label SDR to multilabel via sample duplication, referred to 
as MESD. The other is a multilabel design framework that tackles the SDR problem 
by computing weight (proximity) matrices based on simultaneous feature and label 
information, referred to as MOPE, as a generalization of many current 
techniques. A diverse set of different schemes for label-based proximity 
calculation, as well as a mechanism for combining label-based and feature-based 
weight information by considering information importance and prioritization, are 
proposed for MOPE. Additionally, we summarize many current spectral methods for 
unsupervised DR (UDR), single/multilabel SDR, and semi-supervised DR (SSDR) and 
express them under a common template representation as a general guide to 
researchers in the field. We also propose a general framework for achieving SSDR 
by combining existing SDR and UDR models, and also a procedure of reducing the 
computational cost via learning with a target set of relation features. The 
effectiveness of our proposed methodologies is demonstrated with experiments 
with document collections for multilabel text categorization from the natural 
language processing domain.

DOI: 10.1109/tpami.2012.20
PMID: 23289130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]