408. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2007 Dec;5(6):1319-37. doi: 10.1142/s0219720007003119.

A workflow for mutation extraction and structure annotation.

Kanagasabai R(1), Choo KH, Ranganathan S, Baker CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Mining, Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore, 
Singapore. kanagasa@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Rich information on point mutation studies is scattered across heterogeneous 
data sources. This paper presents an automated workflow for mining mutation 
annotations from full-text biomedical literature using natural language 
processing (NLP) techniques as well as for their subsequent reuse in protein 
structure annotation and visualization. This system, called mSTRAP (Mutation 
extraction and STRucture Annotation Pipeline), is designed for both information 
aggregation and subsequent brokerage of the mutation annotations. It facilitates 
the coordination of semantically related information from a series of text 
mining and sequence analysis steps into a formal OWL-DL ontology. The ontology 
is designed to support application-specific data management of sequence, 
structure, and literature annotations that are populated as instances of object 
and data type properties. mSTRAPviz is a subsystem that facilitates the 
brokerage of structure information and the associated mutations for 
visualization. For mutated sequences without any corresponding structure 
available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), an automated pipeline for homology 
modeling is developed to generate the theoretical model. With mSTRAP, we 
demonstrate a workable system that can facilitate automation of the workflow for 
the retrieval, extraction, processing, and visualization of mutation annotations 
-- tasks which are well known to be tedious, time-consuming, complex, and 
error-prone. The ontology and visualization tool are available at 
(http://datam.i2r.a-star.edu.sg/mstrap).

DOI: 10.1142/s0219720007003119
PMID: 18172931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]