275. Database (Oxford). 2014 May 21;2014:bau038. doi: 10.1093/database/bau038. Print 
2014.

iSimp in BioC standard format: enhancing the interoperability of a sentence 
simplification system.

Peng Y(1), Tudor CO(2), Torii M(2), Wu CH(2), Vijay-Shanker K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, 18 
Amstel Ave, Newark, DE 19716, USA and Center for Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 
19711, USA yfpeng@udel.edu.
(2)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, 18 
Amstel Ave, Newark, DE 19716, USA and Center for Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 
19711, USADepartment of Computer and Information Sciences, University of 
Delaware, 18 Amstel Ave, Newark, DE 19716, USA and Center for Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 
19711, USA.
(3)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, 18 
Amstel Ave, Newark, DE 19716, USA and Center for Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 
19711, USA.

This article reports the use of the BioC standard format in our sentence 
simplification system, iSimp, and demonstrates its general utility. iSimp is 
designed to simplify complex sentences commonly found in the biomedical text, 
and has been shown to improve existing text mining applications that rely on the 
analysis of sentence structures. By adopting the BioC format, we aim to make 
iSimp readily interoperable with other applications in the biomedical domain. To 
examine the utility of iSimp in BioC, we implemented a rule-based relation 
extraction system that uses iSimp as a preprocessing module and BioC for data 
exchange. Evaluation on the training corpus of BioNLP-ST 2011 GENIA Event 
Extraction (GE) task showed that iSimp sentence simplification improved the 
recall by 3.2% without reducing precision. The iSimp simplification-annotated 
corpora, both our previously used corpus and the GE corpus in the current study, 
have been converted into the BioC format and made publicly available at the 
project's Web site: http://research.bioinformatics.udel.edu/isimp/. Database 
URL:http://research.bioinformatics.udel.edu/isimp/

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bau038
PMCID: PMC4028706
PMID: 24850848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]