550. Pilot Feasibility Stud. 2019 Feb 20;5:28. doi: 10.1186/s40814-019-0403-z. 
eCollection 2019.

Designing for implementation: user-centered development and pilot testing of a 
behavioral economic-inspired electronic health record clinical decision support 
module.

Chokshi SK(1), Belli HM(1), Troxel AB(1), Blecker S(1), Blaum C(1), Testa P(1), 
Mann D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health, NYU School of Medicine, 227 E. 30th St., 7th 
Fl, New York, NY 10016 USA.

BACKGROUND: Current guidelines recommend less aggressive target hemoglobin A1c 
(HbA1c) levels based on older age and lower life expectancy for older adults 
with diabetes. The effectiveness of electronic health record (EHR) clinical 
decision support (CDS) in promoting guideline adherence is undermined by alert 
fatigue and poor workflow integration. Integrating behavioral economics (BE) and 
CDS tools is a novel approach to improving adherence to guidelines while 
minimizing clinician burden.
METHODS: We will apply a systematic, user-centered design approach to 
incorporate BE "nudges" into a CDS module and will perform user testing in two 
"vanguard" sites. To accomplish this, we will conduct (1) semi-structured 
interviews with key informants (n = 8), (2) a 2-h, design-thinking workshop to 
derive and refine initial module ideas, and (3) semi-structured group interviews 
at each site with clinic leaders and clinicians to elicit feedback on three 
proposed nudge module components (navigator section, inbasket refill protocol, 
medication preference list). Detailed field notes will be summarized by module 
idea and usability theme for rapid iteration. Frequency of firing and user 
action taken will be assessed in the first month of implementation via EHR 
reporting to confirm that module components and related reporting are working as 
expected as well as assess utilization. To assess the utilization and 
feasibility of the new tools and generate estimates of clinician compliance with 
the Choosing Wisely guideline for diabetes management in older adults, a 
6-month, single-arm pilot study of the BE-EHR module will be conducted in six 
outpatient primary care clinics.
DISCUSSION: We hypothesize that a low burden, user-centered approach to design 
will yield a BE-driven, CDS module with relatively high utilization by 
clinicians. The resulting module will establish a platform for exploring the 
ability of BE concepts embedded within the EHR to affect guideline adherence for 
other use cases.

DOI: 10.1186/s40814-019-0403-z
PMCID: PMC6381676
PMID: 30820339

Conflict of interest statement: This study was approved by the institutional 
review board of the New York University School of Medicine’s Institutional 
Review Board (Reference # i17-01308) in New York.Not applicableThe authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.