555. Biomaterials. 2013 Dec;34(38):10305-18. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.09.038. 
Epub 2013 Sep 27.

The use of nanolipoprotein particles to enhance the immunostimulatory properties 
of innate immune agonists against lethal influenza challenge.

Weilhammer DR(1), Blanchette CD, Fischer NO, Alam S, Loots GG, Corzett M, Thomas 
C, Lychak C, Dunkle AD, Ruitenberg JJ, Ghanekar SA, Sant AJ, Rasley A.

Author information:
(1)Biosciences and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94551, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated that therapies targeting the innate immune 
system have the potential to provide transient, non-specific protection from a 
variety of infectious organisms; however, the potential of enhancing the 
efficacy of such treatments using nano-scale delivery platforms requires more in 
depth evaluation. As such, we employed a nanolipoprotein (NLP) platform to 
enhance the efficacy of innate immune agonists. Here, we demonstrate that the 
synthetic Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA) and 
CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG) can be readily incorporated into NLPs. 
Conjugation of MPLA and CpG to NLPs (MPLA:NLP and CpG:NLP, respectively) 
significantly enhanced their immunostimulatory profiles both in vitro and in 
vivo compared to administration of agonists alone, as evidenced by significant 
increases in cytokine production, cell surface expression of activation markers, 
and upregulation of immunoregulatory genes. Importantly, enhancement of cytokine 
production by agonist conjugation to NLPs was also observed in primary human 
dendritic cells. Furthermore, BALB/c mice pretreated with CpG:NLP constructs 
survived a lethal influenza challenge whereas pretreatment with CpG alone had no 
effect on survival.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.09.038
PMCID: PMC7172747
PMID: 24075406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]