547. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 25;11(3):e0150166. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150166. 
eCollection 2016.

Expression and Association of the Yersinia pestis Translocon Proteins, YopB and 
YopD, Are Facilitated by Nanolipoprotein Particles.

Coleman MA(1)(2), Cappuccio JA(3), Blanchette CD(1), Gao T(2), Arroyo ES(1), 
Hinz AK(1), Bourguet FA(1), Segelke B(1), Hoeprich PD(1), Huser T(2), Laurence 
TA(1), Motin VL(4), Chromy BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, United States of 
America, 94550.
(2)University of California Davis, NSF, Center for Biophotonics, Sacramento, CA, 
United States of America, 95817.
(3)Humboldt State University, Department of Chemistry, Arcata, CA, United States 
of America, 95521.
(4)University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States of America, 
77555.

Yersinia pestis enters host cells and evades host defenses, in part, through 
interactions between Yersinia pestis proteins and host membranes. One such 
interaction is through the type III secretion system, which uses a highly 
conserved and ordered complex for Yersinia pestis outer membrane effector 
protein translocation called the injectisome. The portion of the injectisome 
that interacts directly with host cell membranes is referred to as the 
translocon. The translocon is believed to form a pore allowing effector 
molecules to enter host cells. To facilitate mechanistic studies of the 
translocon, we have developed a cell-free approach for expressing translocon 
pore proteins as a complex supported in a bilayer membrane mimetic nano-scaffold 
known as a nanolipoprotein particle (NLP) Initial results show cell-free 
expression of Yersinia pestis outer membrane proteins YopB and YopD was enhanced 
in the presence of liposomes. However, these complexes tended to aggregate and 
precipitate. With the addition of co-expressed (NLP) forming components, the 
YopB and/or YopD complex was rendered soluble, increasing the yield of protein 
for biophysical studies. Biophysical methods such as Atomic Force Microscopy and 
Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy were used to confirm that the soluble 
YopB/D complex was associated with NLPs. An interaction between the YopB/D 
complex and NLP was validated by immunoprecipitation. The YopB/D translocon 
complex embedded in a NLP provides a platform for protein interaction studies 
between pathogen and host proteins. These studies will help elucidate the poorly 
understood mechanism which enables this pathogen to inject effector proteins 
into host cells, thus evading host defenses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150166
PMCID: PMC4807764
PMID: 27015536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.