642. PLoS Med. 2018 Nov 27;15(11):e1002703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002703. 
eCollection 2018 Nov.

Enhancing the prediction of acute kidney injury risk after percutaneous coronary 
intervention using machine learning techniques: A retrospective cohort study.

Huang C(1), Murugiah K(2), Mahajan S(1), Li SX(1), Dhruva SS(3)(4), Haimovich 
JS(5), Wang Y(1), Schulz WL(1)(6), Testani JM(2), Wilson FP(7), Mena CI(2), 
Masoudi FA(8), Rumsfeld JS(8), Spertus JA(9), Mortazavi BJ(10), Krumholz 
HM(1)(2)(11).

Author information:
(1)Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Hospital, New 
Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.
(2)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.
(3)Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars Program, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United 
States of America.
(4)Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut, 
United States of America.
(5)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of 
America.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, United States of America.
(7)Section of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.
(8)Division of Cardiology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, 
Colorado, United States of America.
(9)Department of Cardiology, Saint Luke's Mid America Heart Institute, Kansas 
City, Missouri, United States of America.
(10)Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas, United States of America.
(11)Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of Public Health, 
New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The current acute kidney injury (AKI) risk prediction model for 
patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) from the American 
College of Cardiology (ACC) National Cardiovascular Data Registry (NCDR) 
employed regression techniques. This study aimed to evaluate whether models 
using machine learning techniques could significantly improve AKI risk 
prediction after PCI.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We used the same cohort and candidate variables used to 
develop the current NCDR CathPCI Registry AKI model, including 947,091 patients 
who underwent PCI procedures between June 1, 2009, and June 30, 2011. The mean 
age of these patients was 64.8 years, and 32.8% were women, with a total of 
69,826 (7.4%) AKI events. We replicated the current AKI model as the baseline 
model and compared it with a series of new models. Temporal validation was 
performed using data from 970,869 patients undergoing PCIs between July 1, 2016, 
and March 31, 2017, with a mean age of 65.7 years; 31.9% were women, and 72,954 
(7.5%) had AKI events. Each model was derived by implementing one of two 
strategies for preprocessing candidate variables (preselecting and transforming 
candidate variables or using all candidate variables in their original forms), 
one of three variable-selection methods (stepwise backward selection, lasso 
regularization, or permutation-based selection), and one of two methods to model 
the relationship between variables and outcome (logistic regression or gradient 
descent boosting). The cohort was divided into different training (70%) and test 
(30%) sets using 100 different random splits, and the performance of the models 
was evaluated internally in the test sets. The best model, according to the 
internal evaluation, was derived by using all available candidate variables in 
their original form, permutation-based variable selection, and gradient descent 
boosting. Compared with the baseline model that uses 11 variables, the best 
model used 13 variables and achieved a significantly better area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.752 (95% confidence interval 
[CI] 0.749-0.754) versus 0.711 (95% CI 0.708-0.714), a significantly better 
Brier score of 0.0617 (95% CI 0.0615-0.0618) versus 0.0636 (95% CI 
0.0634-0.0638), and a better calibration slope of observed versus predicted rate 
of 1.008 (95% CI 0.988-1.028) versus 1.036 (95% CI 1.015-1.056). The best model 
also had a significantly wider predictive range (25.3% versus 21.6%, p < 0.001) 
and was more accurate in stratifying AKI risk for patients. Evaluated on a more 
contemporary CathPCI cohort (July 1, 2015-March 31, 2017), the best model 
consistently achieved significantly better performance than the baseline model 
in AUC (0.785 versus 0.753), Brier score (0.0610 versus 0.0627), calibration 
slope (1.003 versus 1.062), and predictive range (29.4% versus 26.2%). The 
current study does not address implementation for risk calculation at the point 
of care, and potential challenges include the availability and accessibility of 
the predictors.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning techniques and data-driven approaches resulted in 
improved prediction of AKI risk after PCI. The results support the potential of 
these techniques for improving risk prediction models and identification of 
patients who may benefit from risk-mitigation strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002703
PMCID: PMC6258473
PMID: 30481186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: SSD is supported by 
the Department of Veterans Affairs. WLS is a consultant for Hugo, a personal 
health information platform. CIM is a consultant for Cook, Bard, Medtronic, 
Abbott and Cardinal Health. FPW is supported by the National Science Foundation 
grant R01DK113191. JSR is the Chief Innovation Officer for the American College 
of Cardiology. HMK is a recipient of research agreements from Medtronic and from 
Johnson & Johnson (Janssen), through Yale University, to develop methods of 
clinical trial data sharing; was the recipient of a grant from the Food and Drug 
Administration and Medtronic to develop methods for postmarket surveillance of 
medical devices; works under contract with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services to develop and maintain performance measures; chairs a cardiac 
scientific advisory board for UnitedHealth; is a member of the Advisory Board 
for Element Science and the Physician Advisory Board for Aetna; is a 
participant/participant representative of the IBM Watson Health Life Sciences 
Board; and is the founder of Hugo, a personal health information platform. JAS 
is supported by grants from Gilead, Genentech, Lilly, Amorcyte, and EvaHeart and 
has a patent for the Seattle Angina Questionnaire with royalties paid. He also 
owns the copyright to the Seattle Angina Questionnaire. He is the PI of an 
Analytic Center for the American College of Cardiology Foundation and has an 
equity interest in Health Outcomes Sciences. FAM has a contract (through his 
primary institution) for his role as Chief Science Officer of the NCDR. BJM is 
an associate editor for PLOS ONE, which is involved in this special issue. He 
has a relationship with the American College of Cardiology in selecting and 
pursuing innovative research based upon their registry data (unrelated to this 
paper). He has a pending patent application for an EHR-based prediction tool in 
Yale New Haven Health, as well as two funded studies, one by the DoD-Advanced 
Research Projects Agency and one with the NSF to support student travel to 
conferences in the body sensor networks field. American College of Cardiology 
may incorporate this work, or future iterations, into its registry. No other 
organisation named above has a competing interest in relation to this work. The 
other authors report no potential competing interests.