285. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Apr 29;9 Suppl 5(Suppl 5):S5. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-9-S5-S5.

Facilitating the development of controlled vocabularies for metabolomics 
technologies with text mining.

SpasiÄ‡ I(1), Schober D, Sansone SA, Rebholz-Schuhmann D, Kell DB, Paton NW.

Author information:
(1)Manchester Centre for Integrative Systems Biology, The University of 
Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7ND, UK. 
i.spasic@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Many bioinformatics applications rely on controlled vocabularies or 
ontologies to consistently interpret and seamlessly integrate information 
scattered across public resources. Experimental data sets from metabolomics 
studies need to be integrated with one another, but also with data produced by 
other types of omics studies in the spirit of systems biology, hence the 
pressing need for vocabularies and ontologies in metabolomics. However, it is 
time-consuming and non trivial to construct these resources manually.
RESULTS: We describe a methodology for rapid development of controlled 
vocabularies, a study originally motivated by the needs for vocabularies 
describing metabolomics technologies. We present case studies involving two 
controlled vocabularies (for nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and gas 
chromatography) whose development is currently underway as part of the 
Metabolomics Standards Initiative. The initial vocabularies were compiled 
manually, providing a total of 243 and 152 terms. A total of 5,699 and 2,612 new 
terms were acquired automatically from the literature. The analysis of the 
results showed that full-text articles (especially the Materials and Methods 
sections) are the major source of technology-specific terms as opposed to paper 
abstracts.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest a text mining method for efficient corpus-based term 
acquisition as a way of rapidly expanding a set of controlled vocabularies with 
the terms used in the scientific literature. We adopted an integrative approach, 
combining relatively generic software and data resources for time- and 
cost-effective development of a text mining tool for expansion of controlled 
vocabularies across various domains, as a practical alternative to both manual 
term collection and tailor-made named entity recognition methods.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-S5-S5
PMCID: PMC2367623
PMID: 18460187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]