572. J Am Board Fam Med. 2014 Nov-Dec;27(6):804-10. doi: 
10.3122/jabfm.2014.06.140029.

Using geographic information systems (GIS) to identify communities in need of 
health insurance outreach: An OCHIN practice-based research network (PBRN) 
report.

Angier H(1), Likumahuwa S(2), Finnegan S(2), Vakarcs T(2), Nelson C(2), Bazemore 
A(2), Carrozza M(2), DeVoe JE(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Family Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland (HA, SL, JED); the Robert Graham Center, Washington, DC (SF, AB); 
OCHIN, Inc., Portland, OR (TV, CN, JED); and the Health Foundation of Greater 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH (MC). angierh@ohsu.edu.
(2)From the Department of Family Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland (HA, SL, JED); the Robert Graham Center, Washington, DC (SF, AB); 
OCHIN, Inc., Portland, OR (TV, CN, JED); and the Health Foundation of Greater 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH (MC).

BACKGROUND: Our practice-based research network (PBRN) is conducting an outreach 
intervention to increase health insurance coverage for patients seen in the 
network. To assist with outreach site selection, we sought an understandable way 
to use electronic health record (EHR) data to locate uninsured patients.
METHODS: Health insurance information was displayed within a web-based mapping 
platform to demonstrate the feasibility of using geographic information systems 
(GIS) to visualize EHR data. This study used EHR data from 52 clinics in the 
OCHIN PBRN. We included cross-sectional coverage data for patients aged 0 to 64 
years with at least 1 visit to a study clinic during 2011 (n = 228,284).
RESULTS: Our PBRN was successful in using GIS to identify intervention sites. 
Through use of the maps, we found geographic variation in insurance rates of 
patients seeking care in OCHIN PBRN clinics. Insurance rates also varied by age: 
The percentage of adults without insurance ranged from 13.2% to 86.8%; rates of 
children lacking insurance ranged from 1.1% to 71.7%. GIS also showed some areas 
of households with median incomes that had low insurance rates.
DISCUSSION: EHR data can be imported into a web-based GIS mapping tool to 
visualize patient information. Using EHR data, we were able to observe smaller 
areas than could be seen using only publicly available data. Using this 
information, we identified appropriate OCHIN PBRN clinics for dissemination of 
an EHR-based insurance outreach intervention. GIS could also be used by clinics 
to visualize other patient-level characteristics to target clinic outreach 
efforts or interventions.

Â© Copyright 2014 by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2014.06.140029
PMCID: PMC4920044
PMID: 25381078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]