87. Ecancermedicalscience. 2018 Jul 11;12:851. doi: 10.3332/ecancer.2018.851. 
eCollection 2018.

Personal Health Information Recommender: implementing a tool for the empowerment 
of cancer patients.

Iatraki G(1), Kondylakis H(1), Koumakis L(1), Chatzimina M(1), Kazantzaki E(1), 
Marias K(1)(2), Tsiknakis M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational BioMedicine Laboratory, FORTH-ICS, Heraklion GR70013, Greece.
(2)Department of Informatics Engineering, Technological Educational Institute of 
Crete, Heraklion GR71004, Greece.

Nowadays, patients have a wealth of information available on the Internet. 
Despite the potential benefits of Internet health information seeking, several 
concerns have been raised about the quality of information and about the 
patient's capability to evaluate medical information and to relate it to their 
own disease and treatment. As such, novel tools are required to effectively 
guide patients and provide high-quality medical information in an intelligent 
and personalised manner. With this aim, this paper presents the Personal Health 
Information Recommender (PHIR), a system to empower patients by enabling them to 
search in a high-quality document repository selected by experts, avoiding the 
information overload of the Internet. In addition, the information provided to 
the patients is personalised, based on individual preferences, medical 
conditions and other profiling information. Despite the generality of our 
approach, we apply the PHIR to a personal health record system constructed for 
cancer patients and we report on the design, the implementation and a 
preliminary validation of the platform. To the best of our knowledge, our 
platform is the only one combining natural language processing, ontologies and 
personal information to offer a unique user experience.

DOI: 10.3332/ecancer.2018.851
PMCID: PMC6057655
PMID: 30079113