369. PLoS Biol. 2004 Nov;2(11):e309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020309. Epub 2004 Sep 
21.

Textpresso: an ontology-based information retrieval and extraction system for 
biological literature.

MÃ¼ller HM(1), Kenny EE, Sternberg PW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute 
of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2:e343.

We have developed Textpresso, a new text-mining system for scientific literature 
whose capabilities go far beyond those of a simple keyword search engine. 
Textpresso's two major elements are a collection of the full text of scientific 
articles split into individual sentences, and the implementation of categories 
of terms for which a database of articles and individual sentences can be 
searched. The categories are classes of biological concepts (e.g., gene, allele, 
cell or cell group, phenotype, etc.) and classes that relate two objects (e.g., 
association, regulation, etc.) or describe one (e.g., biological process, etc.). 
Together they form a catalog of types of objects and concepts called an 
ontology. After this ontology is populated with terms, the whole corpus of 
articles and abstracts is marked up to identify terms of these categories. The 
current ontology comprises 33 categories of terms. A search engine enables the 
user to search for one or a combination of these tags and/or keywords within a 
sentence or document, and as the ontology allows word meaning to be queried, it 
is possible to formulate semantic queries. Full text access increases recall of 
biological data types from 45% to 95%. Extraction of particular biological 
facts, such as gene-gene interactions, can be accelerated significantly by 
ontologies, with Textpresso automatically performing nearly as well as expert 
curators to identify sentences; in searches for two uniquely named genes and an 
interaction term, the ontology confers a 3-fold increase of search efficiency. 
Textpresso currently focuses on Caenorhabditis elegans literature, with 3,800 
full text articles and 16,000 abstracts. The lexicon of the ontology contains 
14,500 entries, each of which includes all versions of a specific word or 
phrase, and it includes all categories of the Gene Ontology database. Textpresso 
is a useful curation tool, as well as search engine for researchers, and can 
readily be extended to other organism-specific corpora of text. Textpresso can 
be accessed at http://www.textpresso.org or via WormBase at 
http://www.wormbase.org.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020309
PMCID: PMC517822
PMID: 15383839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflicts of 
interest exist.