557. Am J Public Health. 2015 Jun;105(6):1168-73. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2014.302440. Epub 
2015 Apr 16.

Improving identification of fall-related injuries in ambulatory care using 
statistical text mining.

Luther SL(1), McCart JA, Berndt DJ, Hahm B, Finch D, Jarman J, Foulis PR, 
Lapcevic WA, Campbell RR, Shorr RI, Valencia KM, Powell-Cope G.

Author information:
(1)Stephen L. Luther, James A. McCart, Bridget Hahm, Dezon Finch, Philip R. 
Foulis, William A. Lapcevic, Robert R. Campbell, and Gail Powell-Cope are with 
the HSR&D Center of Innovation on Disability and Rehabilitation Research, James 
A. Haley Veterans Hospital, Tampa, FL. Donald J. Berndt is with the University 
of South Florida College of Business Administration, Tampa. Jay Jarman is with 
the East Tennessee State University Department of Computing, Johnson City. 
Ronald I. Shorr is with the North Florida/South Georgia Veterans Health System, 
Gainesville, FL. Keryl Motta Valencia is with the VA Caribbean Healthcare 
System, San Juan, PR.

OBJECTIVES: We determined whether statistical text mining (STM) can identify 
fall-related injuries in electronic health record (EHR) documents and the impact 
on STM models of training on documents from a single or multiple facilities.
METHODS: We obtained fiscal year 2007 records for Veterans Health Administration 
(VHA) ambulatory care clinics in the southeastern United States and Puerto Rico, 
resulting in a total of 26â€‰010 documents for 1652 veterans treated for 
fall-related injury and 1341 matched controls. We used the results of an STM 
model to predict fall-related injuries at the visit and patient levels and 
compared them with a reference standard based on chart review.
RESULTS: STM models based on training data from a single facility resulted in 
accuracy of 87.5% and 87.1%, F-measure of 87.0% and 90.9%, sensitivity of 92.1% 
and 94.1%, and specificity of 83.6% and 77.8% at the visit and patient levels, 
respectively. Results from training data from multiple facilities were almost 
identical.
CONCLUSIONS: STM has the potential to improve identification of fall-related 
injuries in the VHA, providing a model for wider application in the evolving 
national EHR system.

DOI: 10.2105/AJPH.2014.302440
PMCID: PMC4431098
PMID: 25880936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]