286. J Biomed Inform. 2013 Dec;46 Suppl(0):S40-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.11.001. 
Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Towards generating a patient's timeline: extracting temporal relationships from 
clinical notes.

Nikfarjam A(1), Emadzadeh E, Gonzalez G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, Tempe, USA. 
Electronic address: anikfarj@asu.edu.

Clinical records include both coded and free-text fields that interact to 
reflect complicated patient stories. The information often covers not only the 
present medical condition and events experienced by the patient, but also refers 
to relevant events in the past (such as signs, symptoms, tests or treatments). 
In order to automatically construct a timeline of these events, we first need to 
extract the temporal relations between pairs of events or time expressions 
presented in the clinical notes. We designed separate extraction components for 
different types of temporal relations, utilizing a novel hybrid system that 
combines machine learning with a graph-based inference mechanism to extract the 
temporal links. The temporal graph is a directed graph based on parse tree 
dependencies of the simplified sentences and frequent pattern clues. We 
generalized the sentences in order to discover patterns that, given the 
complexities of natural language, might not be directly discoverable in the 
original sentences. The proposed hybrid system performance reached an F-measure 
of 0.63, with precision at 0.76 and recall at 0.54 on the 2012 i2b2 Natural 
Language Processing corpus for the temporal relation (TLink) extraction task, 
achieving the highest precision and third highest f-measure among participating 
teams in the TLink track.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.11.001
PMCID: PMC3974721
PMID: 24212118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]