328. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2013 May 1;7(3):602-11. doi: 10.1177/193229681300700304.

Integration of a mobile-integrated therapy with electronic health records: 
lessons learned.

Peeples MM(1), Iyer AK, Cohen JL.

Author information:
(1)WellDoc, 1501 St. Paul St., Baltimore, MD 21202, USA. mpeeples@welldocinc.com

BACKGROUND: Responses to the chronic disease epidemic have predominantly been 
standardized in their approach to date. Barriers to better health outcomes 
remain, and effective management requires patient-specific data and disease 
state knowledge be presented in methods that foster clinical decision-making and 
patient self-management. Mobile technology provides a new platform for data 
collection and patient-provider communication. The mobile device represents a 
personalized platform that is available to the patient on a 24/7 basis. 
Mobile-integrated therapy (MIT) is the convergence of mobile technology, 
clinical and behavioral science, and scientifically validated clinical outcomes. 
In this article, we highlight the lessons learned from functional integration of 
a Food and Drug Administration-cleared type 2 diabetes MIT into the electronic 
health record (EHR) of a multiphysician practice within a large, urban, academic 
medical center.
METHODS: In-depth interviews were conducted with integration stakeholder groups: 
mobile and EHR software and information technology teams, clinical end users, 
project managers, and business analysts. Interviews were summarized and 
categorized into lessons learned using the Architecture for Integrated Mobility® 
framework.
RESULTS: Findings from the diverse stakeholder group of a MIT-EHR integration 
project indicate that user workflow, software system persistence, environment 
configuration, device connectivity and security, organizational processes, and 
data exchange heuristics are key issues that must be addressed.
CONCLUSIONS: Mobile-integrated therapy that integrates patient self-management 
data with medical record data provides the opportunity to understand the 
potential benefits of bidirectional data sharing and reporting that are most 
valuable in advancing better health and better care in a cost-effective way that 
is scalable for all chronic diseases.

© 2013 Diabetes Technology Society.

DOI: 10.1177/193229681300700304
PMCID: PMC3869127
PMID: 23759392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]