71. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58 Suppl(Suppl):S143-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbi.2015.08.009. Epub 2015 Aug 21.

Mining heart disease risk factors in clinical text with named entity recognition 
and distributional semantic models.

Urbain J(1).

Author information:
(1)Milwaukee School of Engineering, Milwaukee, WI, United States; CTSI of SE 
Wisconsin/Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States. Electronic 
address: urbain@msoe.edu.

We present the design, and analyze the performance of a multi-stage natural 
language processing system employing named entity recognition, Bayesian 
statistics, and rule logic to identify and characterize heart disease risk 
factor events in diabetic patients over time. The system was originally 
developed for the 2014 i2b2 Challenges in Natural Language in Clinical Data. The 
system's strengths included a high level of accuracy for identifying named 
entities associated with heart disease risk factor events. The system's primary 
weakness was due to inaccuracies when characterizing the attributes of some 
events. For example, determining the relative time of an event with respect to 
the record date, whether an event is attributable to the patient's history or 
the patient's family history, and differentiating between current and prior 
smoking status. We believe these inaccuracies were due in large part to the lack 
of an effective approach for integrating context into our event detection model. 
To address these inaccuracies, we explore the addition of a distributional 
semantic model for characterizing contextual evidence of heart disease risk 
factor events. Using this semantic model, we raise our initial 2014 i2b2 
Challenges in Natural Language of Clinical data F1 score of 0.838 to 0.890 and 
increased precision by 10.3% without use of any lexicons that might bias our 
results.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.08.009
PMCID: PMC4984540
PMID: 26305514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]