224. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014 Aug 23;15(1):285. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-285.

A generalizable NLP framework for fast development of pattern-based biomedical 
relation extraction systems.

Peng Y(1), Torii M, Wu CH, Vijay-Shanker K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, 18 
Amstel Ave, Newark, DE 19716, USA. yfpeng@udel.edu.

BACKGROUND: Text mining is increasingly used in the biomedical domain because of 
its ability to automatically gather information from large amount of scientific 
articles. One important task in biomedical text mining is relation extraction, 
which aims to identify designated relations among biological entities reported 
in literature. A relation extraction system achieving high performance is 
expensive to develop because of the substantial time and effort required for its 
design and implementation. Here, we report a novel framework to facilitate the 
development of a pattern-based biomedical relation extraction system. It has 
several unique design features: (1) leveraging syntactic variations possible in 
a language and automatically generating extraction patterns in a systematic 
manner, (2) applying sentence simplification to improve the coverage of 
extraction patterns, and (3) identifying referential relations between a 
syntactic argument of a predicate and the actual target expected in the relation 
extraction task.
RESULTS: A relation extraction system derived using the proposed framework 
achieved overall F-scores of 72.66% for the Simple events and 55.57% for the 
Binding events on the BioNLP-ST 2011 GE test set, comparing favorably with the 
top performing systems that participated in the BioNLP-ST 2011 GE task. We 
obtained similar results on the BioNLP-ST 2013 GE test set (80.07% and 60.58%, 
respectively). We conducted additional experiments on the training and 
development sets to provide a more detailed analysis of the system and its 
individual modules. This analysis indicates that without increasing the number 
of patterns, simplification and referential relation linking play a key role in 
the effective extraction of biomedical relations.
CONCLUSIONS: In this paper, we present a novel framework for fast development of 
relation extraction systems. The framework requires only a list of triggers as 
input, and does not need information from an annotated corpus. Thus, we reduce 
the involvement of domain experts, who would otherwise have to provide manual 
annotations and help with the design of hand crafted patterns. We demonstrate 
how our framework is used to develop a system which achieves state-of-the-art 
performance on a public benchmark corpus.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-285
PMCID: PMC4262219
PMID: 25149151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]