422. J Biomed Inform. 2012 Feb;45(1):82-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.09.001. Epub 2011 
Sep 17.

Incorporating personalized gene sequence variants, molecular genetics knowledge, 
and health knowledge into an EHR prototype based on the Continuity of Care 
Record standard.

Jing X(1), Kay S, Marley T, Hardiker NR, Cimino JJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Informatics Development, NIH Clinical Center and National 
Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA. xia.jing@nih.gov

OBJECTIVES: The current volume and complexity of genetic tests, and the 
molecular genetics knowledge and health knowledge related to interpretation of 
the results of those tests, are rapidly outstripping the ability of individual 
clinicians to recall, understand and convey to their patients information 
relevant to their care. The tailoring of molecular genetics knowledge and health 
knowledge in clinical settings is important both for the provision of 
personalized medicine and to reduce clinician information overload. In this 
paper we describe the incorporation, customization and demonstration of 
molecular genetic data (mainly sequence variants), molecular genetics knowledge 
and health knowledge into a standards-based electronic health record (EHR) 
prototype developed specifically for this study.
METHODS: We extended the CCR (Continuity of Care Record), an existing EHR 
standard for representing clinical data, to include molecular genetic data. An 
EHR prototype was built based on the extended CCR and designed to display 
relevant molecular genetics knowledge and health knowledge from an existing 
knowledge base for cystic fibrosis (OntoKBCF). We reconstructed test records 
from published case reports and represented them in the CCR schema. We then used 
the EHR to dynamically filter molecular genetics knowledge and health knowledge 
from OntoKBCF using molecular genetic data and clinical data from the test 
cases.
RESULTS: The molecular genetic data were successfully incorporated in the CCR by 
creating a category of laboratory results called "Molecular Genetics" and 
specifying a particular class of test ("Gene Mutation Test") in this category. 
Unlike other laboratory tests reported in the CCR, results of tests in this 
class required additional attributes ("Molecular Structure" and "Molecular 
Position") to support interpretation by clinicians. These results, along with 
clinical data (age, sex, ethnicity, diagnostic procedures, and therapies) were 
used by the EHR to filter and present molecular genetics knowledge and health 
knowledge from OntoKBCF.
CONCLUSIONS: This research shows a feasible model for delivering patient 
sequence variants and presenting tailored molecular genetics knowledge and 
health knowledge via a standards-based EHR system prototype. EHR standards can 
be extended to include the necessary patient data (as we have demonstrated in 
the case of the CCR), while knowledge can be obtained from external knowledge 
bases that are created and maintained independently from the EHR. This approach 
can form the basis for a personalized medicine framework, a more comprehensive 
standards-based EHR system and a potential platform for advancing translational 
research by both disseminating results and providing opportunities for new 
insights into phenotype-genotype relationships.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.09.001
PMCID: PMC3272091
PMID: 21946299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]