608. BMJ Open. 2019 Sep 18;9(9):e029582. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-029582.

From EHR to PHR: let's get the record straight.

Symons JD(1), Ashrafian H(2), Dunscombe R(3), Darzi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Global Health Innovation, Imperial College London, London, UK 
j.symons@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Global Health Innovation, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.

This article reflects on the changing nature of health information access and 
the transition of focus from electronic health records (EHRs) to personal health 
records (PHRs) along with the challenges and need for alignment of national 
initiatives for EHR and PHR in the National Health Service (NHS) of the UK. The 
importance of implementing integrated EHRs as a route to enhance the quality of 
health delivery has been increasingly understood. EHRs, however, carry several 
limitations that include major fragmentation through multiple providers and 
protocols throughout the NHS. Questions over ownership and control of data 
further complicate the potential for fully utilising records. Analysing the 
previous initiatives and the current landscape, we identify that adopting a 
patient health record system can empower patients and allow better harmonisation 
of clinical data at a national level. We propose regional PHR 'hubs' to provide 
a universal interface that integrates digital health data at a regional level 
with further integration at a national level. We propose that these PHR hubs 
will reduce the complexity of connections, decrease governance challenges and 
interoperability issues while also providing a safe platform for high-quality 
scalable and sustainable digital solutions, including artificial intelligence 
across the UK NHS, serving as an exemplar for other countries which wish to 
realise the full value of healthcare records.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-029582
PMCID: PMC6756332
PMID: 31537566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.