242. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2018 Jul-Aug;15(4):1239-1246. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2015.2505278. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Towards Extracting Supporting Information About Predicted Protein-Protein 
Interactions.

Roth A, Subramanian S, Ganapathiraju MK.

One of the goals of relation extraction is to identify protein-protein 
interactions (PPIs) in biomedical literature. Current systems are capturing 
binary relations and also the direction and type of an interaction. Besides 
assisting in the curation PPIs into databases, there has been little real-world 
application of these algorithms. We describe UPSITE, a text mining tool for 
extracting evidence in support of a hypothesized interaction. Given a predicted 
PPI, UPSITE uses a binary relation detector to check whether a PPI is found in 
abstracts in PubMed. If it is not found, UPSITE retrieves documents relevant to 
each of the two proteins separately, and extracts contextual information about 
biological events surrounding each protein, and calculates semantic similarity 
of the two proteins to provide evidential support for the predicted PPI. In 
evaluations, relation extraction achieved an Fscore of 0.88 on the HPRD50 
corpus, and semantic similarity measured with angular distance was found to be 
statistically significant. With the development of PPI prediction algorithms, 
the burden of interpreting the validity and relevance of novel PPIs is on 
biologists. We suggest that presenting annotations of the two proteins in a PPI 
side-by-side and a score that quantifies their similarity lessens this burden to 
some extent.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2015.2505278
PMID: 26672046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]