240. Front Neuroinform. 2015 May 21;9:13. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2015.00013. eCollection 
2015.

Text mining for neuroanatomy using WhiteText with an updated corpus and a new 
web application.

French L(1), Liu P(2), Marais O(2), Koreman T(2), Tseng L(2), Lai A(2), Pavlidis 
P(3).

Author information:
(1)Rotman Research Institute, University of Toronto Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia Vancouver, BC, 
Canada ; Centre for High-Throughput Biology, University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

We describe the WhiteText project, and its progress towards automatically 
extracting statements of neuroanatomical connectivity from text. We review 
progress to date on the three main steps of the project: recognition of brain 
region mentions, standardization of brain region mentions to neuroanatomical 
nomenclature, and connectivity statement extraction. We further describe a new 
version of our manually curated corpus that adds 2,111 connectivity statements 
from 1,828 additional abstracts. Cross-validation classification within the new 
corpus replicates results on our original corpus, recalling 67% of connectivity 
statements at 51% precision. The resulting merged corpus provides 5,208 
connectivity statements that can be used to seed species-specific connectivity 
matrices and to better train automated techniques. Finally, we present a new web 
application that allows fast interactive browsing of the over 70,000 sentences 
indexed by the system, as a tool for accessing the data and assisting in further 
curation. Software and data are freely available at 
http://www.chibi.ubc.ca/WhiteText/.

DOI: 10.3389/fninf.2015.00013
PMCID: PMC4439553
PMID: 26052282