255. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015;16 Suppl 10(Suppl 10):S8. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-16-S10-S8. Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Extracting biomedical events from pairs of text entities.

Liu X, Bordes A, Grandvalet Y.

BACKGROUND: Huge amounts of electronic biomedical documents, such as molecular 
biology reports or genomic papers are generated daily. Nowadays, these documents 
are mainly available in the form of unstructured free texts, which require heavy 
processing for their registration into organized databases. This organization is 
instrumental for information retrieval, enabling to answer the advanced queries 
of researchers and practitioners in biology, medicine, and related fields. 
Hence, the massive data flow calls for efficient automatic methods of 
text-mining that extract high-level information, such as biomedical events, from 
biomedical text. The usual computational tools of Natural Language Processing 
cannot be readily applied to extract these biomedical events, due to the 
peculiarities of the domain. Indeed, biomedical documents contain highly 
domain-specific jargon and syntax. These documents also describe distinctive 
dependencies, making text-mining in molecular biology a specific discipline.
RESULTS: We address biomedical event extraction as the classification of pairs 
of text entities into the classes corresponding to event types. The candidate 
pairs of text entities are recursively provided to a multiclass classifier 
relying on Support Vector Machines. This recursive process extracts events 
involving other events as arguments. Compared to joint models based on Markov 
Random Fields, our model simplifies inference and hence requires shorter 
training and prediction times along with lower memory capacity. Compared to 
usual pipeline approaches, our model passes over a complex intermediate problem, 
while making a more extensive usage of sophisticated joint features between text 
entities. Our method focuses on the core event extraction of the Genia task of 
BioNLP challenges yielding the best result reported so far on the 2013 edition.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-16-S10-S8
PMCID: PMC4511465
PMID: 26201478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]