261. J Cheminform. 2015 Jan 19;7(Suppl 1 Text mining for chemistry and the CHEMDNER 
track):S9. doi: 10.1186/1758-2946-7-S1-S9. eCollection 2015.

Incorporating domain knowledge in chemical and biomedical named entity 
recognition with word representations.

Munkhdalai T(1), Li M(1), Batsuren K(1), Park HA(1), Choi NH(1), Ryu KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Database/Bioinformatics Laboratory, School of Electrical & Computer 
Engineering, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Chemical and biomedical Named Entity Recognition (NER) is an 
essential prerequisite task before effective text mining can begin for 
biochemical-text data. Exploiting unlabeled text data to leverage system 
performance has been an active and challenging research topic in text mining due 
to the recent growth in the amount of biomedical literature. We present a 
semi-supervised learning method that efficiently exploits unlabeled data in 
order to incorporate domain knowledge into a named entity recognition model and 
to leverage system performance. The proposed method includes Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) tasks for text preprocessing, learning word representation 
features from a large amount of text data for feature extraction, and 
conditional random fields for token classification. Other than the free text in 
the domain, the proposed method does not rely on any lexicon nor any dictionary 
in order to keep the system applicable to other NER tasks in bio-text data.
RESULTS: We extended BANNER, a biomedical NER system, with the proposed method. 
This yields an integrated system that can be applied to chemical and drug NER or 
biomedical NER. We call our branch of the BANNER system BANNER-CHEMDNER, which 
is scalable over millions of documents, processing about 530 documents per 
minute, is configurable via XML, and can be plugged into other systems by using 
the BANNER Unstructured Information Management Architecture (UIMA) interface. 
BANNER-CHEMDNER achieved an 85.68% and an 86.47% F-measure on the testing sets 
of CHEMDNER Chemical Entity Mention (CEM) and Chemical Document Indexing (CDI) 
subtasks, respectively, and achieved an 87.04% F-measure on the official testing 
set of the BioCreative II gene mention task, showing remarkable performance in 
both chemical and biomedical NER. BANNER-CHEMDNER system is available at: 
https://bitbucket.org/tsendeemts/banner-chemdner.

DOI: 10.1186/1758-2946-7-S1-S9
PMCID: PMC4331699
PMID: 25810780