535. EGEMS (Wash DC). 2013 Sep 10;1(1):1025. doi: 10.13063/2327-9214.1025. 
eCollection 2013.

Preparing Electronic Clinical Data for Quality Improvement and Comparative 
Effectiveness Research: The SCOAP CERTAIN Automation and Validation Project.

Devine EB(1), Capurro D(1), van Eaton E(1), Alfonso-Cristancho R(1), Devlin 
A(1), Yanez ND(1), Yetisgen-Yildiz M(1), Flum DR(1), Tarczy-Hornoch P(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington.

BACKGROUND: The field of clinical research informatics includes creation of 
clinical data repositories (CDRs) used to conduct quality improvement (QI) 
activities and comparative effectiveness research (CER). Ideally, CDR data are 
accurately and directly abstracted from disparate electronic health records 
(EHRs), across diverse health-systems.
OBJECTIVE: Investigators from Washington State's Surgical Care Outcomes and 
Assessment Program (SCOAP) Comparative Effectiveness Research Translation 
Network (CERTAIN) are creating such a CDR. This manuscript describes the 
automation and validation methods used to create this digital infrastructure.
METHODS: SCOAP is a QI benchmarking initiative. Data are manually abstracted 
from EHRs and entered into a data management system. CERTAIN investigators are 
now deploying Caradigm's Amalgaâ„¢ tool to facilitate automated abstraction of 
data from multiple, disparate EHRs. Concordance is calculated to compare data 
automatically to manually abstracted. Performance measures are calculated 
between Amalga and each parent EHR. Validation takes place in repeated loops, 
with improvements made over time. When automated abstraction reaches the current 
benchmark for abstraction accuracy - 95% - itwill 'go-live' at each site.
PROGRESS TO DATE: A technical analysis was completed at 14 sites. Five sites are 
contributing; the remaining sites prioritized meeting Meaningful Use criteria. 
Participating sites are contributing 15-18 unique data feeds, totaling 13 
surgical registry use cases. Common feeds are registration, laboratory, 
transcription/dictation, radiology, and medications. Approximately 50% of 1,320 
designated data elements are being automatically abstracted-25% from structured 
data; 25% from text mining.
CONCLUSION: In semi-automating data abstraction and conducting a rigorous 
validation, CERTAIN investigators will semi-automate data collection to conduct 
QI and CER, while advancing the Learning Healthcare System.

DOI: 10.13063/2327-9214.1025
PMCID: PMC4371452
PMID: 25848565