274. J Digit Imaging. 2020 Feb 19. doi: 10.1007/s10278-020-00327-z. Online ahead of 
print.

Natural Language Processing in Dutch FreeÂ Text Radiology Reports: Challenges in 
a Small Language Area Staging Pulmonary Oncology.

Nobel JM(1)(2), Puts S(3), Bakers FCH(4), Robben SGF(4)(5), Dekker ALAJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical 
Center+, Postbox 5800, 6202, Maastricht, AZ, Netherlands. martijn.nobel@mumc.nl.
(2)School of Health Professions Education, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
Netherlands. martijn.nobel@mumc.nl.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology (MAASTRO), GROW School for Oncology and 
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical 
Center+, Postbox 5800, 6202, Maastricht, AZ, Netherlands.
(5)School of Health Professions Education, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.

Reports are the standard way of communication between the radiologist and the 
referring clinician. Efforts are made to improve this communication by, for 
instance, introducing standardization and structured reporting. Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) is another promising tool which can improve and enhance the 
radiological report by processing free text. NLP as such adds structure to the 
report and exposes the information, which in turn can be used for further 
analysis. This paper describes pre-processing and processing steps and 
highlights important challenges to overcome in order to successfully implement a 
free text mining algorithm using NLP tools and machine learning in a small 
language area, like Dutch. A rule-based algorithm was constructed to classify 
T-stage of pulmonary oncology from the original free text radiological report, 
based on the items tumor size, presence and involvement according to the 8th TNM 
classification system. PyContextNLP, spaCy and regular expressions were used as 
tools to extract the correct information and process the free text. Overall 
accuracy of the algorithm for evaluating T-stage was 0,83 in the training set 
and 0,87 in the validation set, which shows that the approach in this pilot 
study is promising. Future research with larger datasets and external validation 
is needed to be able to introduce more machine learning approaches and perhaps 
to reduce required input efforts of domain-specific knowledge. However, a hybrid 
NLP approach will probably achieve the best results.

DOI: 10.1007/s10278-020-00327-z
PMID: 32076924