107. J Biomed Semantics. 2012 Apr 1;3:3. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-3.

BioLemmatizer: a lemmatization tool for morphological processing of biomedical 
text.

Liu H(1), Christiansen T, Baumgartner WA Jr, Verspoor K.

Author information:
(1)Colorado Computational Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Haibin.Liu@ucdenver.edu.

BACKGROUND: The wide variety of morphological variants of domain-specific 
technical terms contributes to the complexity of performing natural language 
processing of the scientific literature related to molecular biology. For 
morphological analysis of these texts, lemmatization has been actively applied 
in the recent biomedical research.
RESULTS: In this work, we developed a domain-specific lemmatization tool, 
BioLemmatizer, for the morphological analysis of biomedical literature. The tool 
focuses on the inflectional morphology of English and is based on the general 
English lemmatization tool MorphAdorner. The BioLemmatizer is further tailored 
to the biological domain through incorporation of several published lexical 
resources. It retrieves lemmas based on the use of a word lexicon, and defines a 
set of rules that transform a word to a lemma if it is not encountered in the 
lexicon. An innovative aspect of the BioLemmatizer is the use of a hierarchical 
strategy for searching the lexicon, which enables the discovery of the correct 
lemma even if the input Part-of-Speech information is inaccurate. The 
BioLemmatizer achieves an accuracy of 97.5% in lemmatizing an evaluation set 
prepared from the CRAFT corpus, a collection of full-text biomedical articles, 
and an accuracy of 97.6% on the LLL05 corpus. The contribution of the 
BioLemmatizer to accuracy improvement of a practical information extraction task 
is further demonstrated when it is used as a component in a biomedical text 
mining system.
CONCLUSIONS: The BioLemmatizer outperforms other tools when compared with eight 
existing lemmatizers. The BioLemmatizer is released as an open source software 
and can be downloaded from http://biolemmatizer.sourceforge.net.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-3
PMCID: PMC3359276
PMID: 22464129