581. Front Oncol. 2019 May 22;9:375. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00375. eCollection 2019.

Electronic Health Record-Based Screening for Major Cancers: A 9-Year Experience 
in Minhang District of Shanghai, China.

He D(1), Xu W(2)(3), Su H(1), Li W(1), Zhou J(1), Yao B(1), Xu D(1), He N(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Minhang District, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, Ministry of Education, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

Background: An electronic health record (e-HR) system has been developed in 
Minhang District of Shanghai, China, since 2005, making it convenient for local 
health institutions to provide integrative and comprehensive health care and 
management for major diseases. Methods: In 2008, an e-HR-based cancer prevention 
program was initiated to screen multiple cancers, including colorectal, gastric, 
liver, lung, cervical, and breast cancers, and provide subsequent health 
education and health management to cancer patients and high-risk individuals. 
This study was designed in prospective analysis, based on the constructive 
analysis of key information, observation of cancer screening and healthcare 
processes and organizations, and stages of cancers detected by the e-HR-based 
programs. Results: From 2008 to 2016, health education was conducted for over 5 
million attendances, and more than 3 million screening tests were performed for 
eligible residents over 40 years old. A total of 2,948 cancer cases were 
detected, accounting for 13.3% of all newly diagnosed cancers in the district 
during the 9-year period. Thirty point seven percent detected cancer cases were 
at the early stage, significantly higher than the 22.9% in cases identified by 
e-HR-based follow-up and 13.8% in cases diagnosed due to signs or symptoms. More 
than 136,000 residents were identified as individuals at high risk of cancer and 
subject to sustainable clinical follow-up and health management. Conclusions: 
The successful application of e-HR system in cancer prevention and control in 
Minhang district of Shanghai, China, implies that the system may act as an 
extendable and sustainable infrastructure for comprehensive health care and 
services for a broad spectrum of diseases and health events.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00375
PMCID: PMC6538689
PMID: 31179238