637. Vaccine. 2017 Mar 13;35(11):1475-1481. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.02.004. Epub 
2017 Feb 14.

Enhancement of antigen-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell responses using a 
self-assembled biologic nanolipoprotein particle vaccine.

Weilhammer D(1), Dunkle AD(1), Blanchette CD(1), Fischer NO(1), Corzett M(1), 
Lehmann D(2), Boone T(2), Hoeprich P(1), Driks A(2), Rasley A(3).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Loyola University Medical Center, 
United States.
(3)Biosciences and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, United States. Electronic address: Rasley2@llnl.gov.

To address the need for vaccine platforms that induce robust cell-mediated 
immunity, we investigated the potential of utilizing self-assembling biologic 
nanolipoprotein particles (NLPs) as an antigen and adjuvant delivery system to 
induce antigen-specific murine T cell responses. We utilized OT-I and OT-II 
TCR-transgenic mice to investigate the effects of NLP-mediated delivery of the 
model antigen ovalbumin (OVA) on T cell activation. Delivery of OVA with the 
TLR4 agonist monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA) in the context of NLPs significantly 
enhanced the activation of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in vitro compared to 
co-administration of free OVA and MPLA. Upon intranasal immunization of mice 
harboring TCR-transgenic cells, NLPs enhanced the adjuvant effects of MPLA and 
the in vivo delivery of OVA, leading to significantly increased expansion of 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in lung-draining lymph nodes. Therefore, NLPs are a 
promising vaccine platform for inducing T cell responses following intranasal 
administration.

Copyright Â© 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.02.004
PMID: 28214044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]