378. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015;16 Suppl 7(Suppl 7):S6. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-16-S7-S6. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Self-training in significance space of support vectors for imbalanced biomedical 
event data.

Munkhdalai T, Namsrai OE, Ryu K.

BACKGROUND: Pairwise relationships extracted from biomedical literature are 
insufficient in formulating biomolecular interactions. Extraction of complex 
relations (namely, biomedical events) has become the main focus of the 
text-mining community. However, there are two critical issues that are seldom 
dealt with by existing systems. First, an annotated corpus for training a 
prediction model is highly imbalanced. Second, supervised models trained on only 
a single annotated corpus can limit system performance. Fortunately, there is a 
large pool of unlabeled data containing much of the domain background that one 
can exploit.
RESULTS: In this study, we develop a new semi-supervised learning method to 
address the issues outlined above. The proposed algorithm efficiently exploits 
the unlabeled data to leverage system performance. We furthermore extend our 
algorithm to a two-phase learning framework. The first phase balances the 
training data for initial model induction. The second phase incorporates domain 
knowledge into the event extraction model. The effectiveness of our method is 
evaluated on the Genia event extraction corpus and a PubMed document pool. Our 
method can identify a small subset of the majority class, which is sufficient 
for building a well-generalized prediction model. It outperforms the traditional 
self-training algorithm in terms of f-measure. Our model, based on the training 
data and the unlabeled data pool, achieves comparable performance to the 
state-of-the-art systems that are trained on a larger annotated set consisting 
of training and evaluation data.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-16-S7-S6
PMCID: PMC4423724
PMID: 25952719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]