417. Healthcare (Basel). 2020 Aug 14;8(3):E272. doi: 10.3390/healthcare8030272.

Automatic Incident Triage in Radiation Oncology Incident Learning System.

Syed K(1), Sleeman W 4th(1)(2), Hagan M(2)(3), Palta J(2)(3), Kapoor R(2)(3), 
Ghosh P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
VA 23284, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
VA 23298, USA.
(3)Department of Veteran Affairs, National Radiation Oncology Program, Richmond, 
VA 23249, USA.

The Radiotherapy Incident Reporting and Analysis System (RIRAS) receives 
incident reports from Radiation Oncology facilities across the US Veterans 
Health Affairs (VHA) enterprise and Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU). In 
this work, we propose a computational pipeline for analysis of radiation 
oncology incident reports. Our pipeline uses machine learning (ML) and natural 
language processing (NLP) based methods to predict the severity of the incidents 
reported in the RIRAS platform using the textual description of the reported 
incidents. These incidents in RIRAS are reviewed by a radiation oncology subject 
matter expert (SME), who initially triages some incidents based on the salient 
elements in the incident report. To automate the triage process, we used the 
data from the VHA treatment centers and the VCU radiation oncology department. 
We used NLP combined with traditional ML algorithms, including support vector 
machine (SVM) with linear kernel, and compared it against the transfer learning 
approach with the universal language model fine-tuning (ULMFiT) algorithm. In 
RIRAS, severities are divided into four categories; A, B, C, and D, with A being 
the most severe to D being the least. In this work, we built models to predict 
High (A & B) vs. Low (C & D) severity instead of all the four categories. Models 
were evaluated with macro-averaged precision, recall, and F1-Score. The 
Traditional ML machine learning (SVM-linear) approach did well on the VHA 
dataset with 0.78 F1-Score but performed poorly on the VCU dataset with 0.5 
F1-Score. The transfer learning approach did well on both datasets with 0.81 
F1-Score on VHA dataset and 0.68 F1-Score on the VCU dataset. Overall, our 
methods show promise in automating the triage and severity determination process 
from radiotherapy incident reports.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare8030272
PMID: 32823971