76. Chin Med Sci J. 2019 Jun 30;34(2):90-102. doi: 10.24920/003579.

Constructing Large Scale Cohort for Clinical Study on Heart Failure with 
Electronic Health Record in Regional Healthcare Platform: Challenges and 
Strategies in Data Reuse.

Liu DW(1), Lei LQ(1), Ruan T(1), He P(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Science and Engineering, East China University of 
Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China.
(2)Shanghai Hospital Development Center, Shanghai 200041, China.

Regional healthcare platforms collect clinical data from hospitals in specific 
areas for the purpose of healthcare management. It is a common requirement to 
reuse the data for clinical research. However, we have to face challenges like 
the inconsistence of terminology in electronic health records (EHR) and the 
complexities in data quality and data formats in regional healthcare platform. 
In this paper, we propose methodology and process on constructing large scale 
cohorts which forms the basis of causality and comparative effectiveness 
relationship in epidemiology. We firstly constructed a Chinese terminology 
knowledge graph to deal with the diversity of vocabularies on regional platform. 
Secondly, we built special disease case repositories (i.e., heart failure 
repository) that utilize the graph to search the related patients and to 
normalize the data. Based on the requirements of the clinical research which 
aimed to explore the effectiveness of taking statin on 180-days readmission in 
patients with heart failure, we built a large-scale retrospective cohort with 
29647 cases of heart failure patients from the heart failure repository. After 
the propensity score matching, the study group (n=6346) and the control group 
(n=6346) with parallel clinical characteristics were acquired. Logistic 
regression analysis showed that taking statins had a negative correlation with 
180-days readmission in heart failure patients. This paper presents the workflow 
and application example of big data mining based on regional EHR data.

DOI: 10.24920/003579
PMID: 31315750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]