94. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2016;939:139-166. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-1503-8_7.

Text Mining for Precision Medicine: Bringing Structure to EHRs and Biomedical 
Literature to Understand Genes and Health.

Simmons M(1), Singhal A(1), Lu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), National Library of 
Medicine (NLM), 8600 Rockville Pike, Bldg 38A, 10N1003A, Bethesda, MD, 20894, 
USA.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), National Library of 
Medicine (NLM), 8600 Rockville Pike, Bldg 38A, 10N1003A, Bethesda, MD, 20894, 
USA. zhiyong.lu@nih.gov.

The key question of precision medicine is whether it is possible to find 
clinically actionable granularity in diagnosing disease and classifying patient 
risk. The advent of next-generation sequencing and the widespread adoption of 
electronic health records (EHRs) have provided clinicians and researchers a 
wealth of data and made possible the precise characterization of individual 
patient genotypes and phenotypes. Unstructured text-found in biomedical 
publications and clinical notes-is an important component of genotype and 
phenotype knowledge. Publications in the biomedical literature provide essential 
information for interpreting genetic data. Likewise, clinical notes contain the 
richest source of phenotype information in EHRs. Text mining can render these 
texts computationally accessible and support information extraction and 
hypothesis generation. This chapter reviews the mechanics of text mining in 
precision medicine and discusses several specific use cases, including database 
curation for personalized cancer medicine, patient outcome prediction from 
EHR-derived cohorts, and pharmacogenomic research. Taken as a whole, these use 
cases demonstrate how text mining enables effective utilization of existing 
knowledge sources and thus promotes increased value for patients and healthcare 
systems. Text mining is an indispensable tool for translating genotype-phenotype 
data into effective clinical care that will undoubtedly play an important role 
in the eventual realization of precision medicine.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-1503-8_7
PMCID: PMC5931382
PMID: 27807747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]