337. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2012 Sep-Oct;19(5):888-96. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2012-000808. Epub 2012 May 3.

Coreference resolution of medical concepts in discharge summaries by exploiting 
contextual information.

Dai HJ(1), Chen CY, Wu CY, Lai PT, Tsai RT, Hsu WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Taiwan, ROC.

OBJECTIVE: Patient discharge summaries provide detailed medical information 
about hospitalized patients and are a rich resource of data for clinical record 
text mining. The textual expressions of this information are highly variable. In 
order to acquire a precise understanding of the patient, it is important to 
uncover the relationship between all instances in the text. In natural language 
processing (NLP), this task falls under the category of coreference resolution.
DESIGN: A key contribution of this paper is the application of 
contextual-dependent rules that describe relationships between coreference 
pairs. To resolve phrases that refer to the same entity, the authors use these 
rules in three representative NLP systems: one rule-based, another based on the 
maximum entropy model, and the last a system built on the Markov logic network 
(MLN) model.
RESULTS: The experimental results show that the proposed MLN-based system 
outperforms the baseline system (exact match) by average F-scores of 4.3% and 
5.7% on the Beth and Partners datasets, respectively. Finally, the three systems 
were integrated into an ensemble system, further improving performance to 
87.21%, which is 4.5% more than the official i2b2 Track 1C average (82.7%).
CONCLUSION: In this paper, the main challenges in the resolution of coreference 
relations in patient discharge summaries are described. Several rules are 
proposed to exploit contextual information, and three approaches presented. 
While single systems provided promising results, an ensemble approach combining 
the three systems produced a better performance than even the best single 
system.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2012-000808
PMCID: PMC3422837
PMID: 22556185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.