104. Appl Clin Inform. 2018 Jan;9(1):199-204. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1635096. Epub 2018 
Mar 21.

Collaborating for Competency-A Model for Single Electronic Health Record 
Onboarding for Medical Students Rotating among Separate Health Systems.

Pereira AG(1), Kim M(1), Seywerd M(2), Nesbitt B(3), Pitt MB(4); Minnesota 
Epic101 Collaborative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, United States.
(2)Fairview Health Services, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States.
(3)Department of Integrated Education, Clinical Experiences, University of 
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
United States.

BACKGROUND: Use of the electronic health record (EHR) is widespread in academic 
medical centers, and hands-on EHR experience in medical school is essential for 
new residents to be able to meaningfully contribute to patient care. As 
system-specific EHR training is not portable across institutions-even when the 
same EHR platform is used-students rotating across health systems are often 
required to spend time away from clinical training to complete each system's, 
often duplicative, EHR training regardless of their competency within the EHR.
METHODS: We aimed to create a single competency-based Epic onboarding process 
that would be portable across all the institutions in which our medical students 
complete clinical rotations. In collaboration with six health systems, we 
created online EHR training modules using a systematic approach to curriculum 
development and created an assessment within the Epic practice environment.
RESULTS: All six collaborating health systems accepted successful completion of 
the developed assessment in lieu of standard site-specific medical student EHR 
training. In the pilot year, 443 students (94%) completed the modules and 
assessment prior to their clinical training and successfully entered clinical 
rotations without time consuming, often repetitive onsite training, decreasing 
the cumulative time as student might be expected to engage in Epic onboarding as 
much as 20-fold.
CONCLUSION: Medical schools with multisystem training sites with a single type 
of EHR can adopt this approach to minimize training burden for their learners 
and to allow them more time in the clinical setting with optimized access to the 
EHR.

Schattauer GmbH Stuttgart.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1635096
PMCID: PMC5863062
PMID: 29564849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.