368. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;680:57-64. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-5913-3_7.

ChemBrowser: a flexible framework for mining chemical documents.

Wu X(1), Zhang L, Chen Y, Rhodes J, Griffin TD, Boyer SK, Alba A, Cai K.

Author information:
(1)IBM China Research Lab, Beijing 100193, China. wuxian@cn.ibm.com

The ability to extract chemical and biological entities and relations from text 
documents automatically has great value to biochemical research and development 
activities. The growing maturity of text mining and artificial intelligence 
technologies shows promise in enabling such automatic chemical entity extraction 
capabilities (called "Chemical Annotation" in this paper). Many techniques have 
been reported in the literature, ranging from dictionary and rule-based 
techniques to machine learning approaches. In practice, we found that no single 
technique works well in all cases. A combinatorial approach that allows one to 
quickly compose different annotation techniques together for a given situation 
is most effective. In this paper, we describe the key challenges we face in 
real-world chemical annotation scenarios. We then present a solution called 
ChemBrowser which has a flexible framework for chemical annotation. ChemBrowser 
includes a suite of customizable processing units that might be utilized in a 
chemical annotator, a high-level language that describes the composition of 
various processing units that would form a chemical annotator, and an execution 
engine that translates the composition language to an actual annotator that can 
generate annotation results for a given set of documents. We demonstrate the 
impact of this approach by tailoring an annotator for extracting chemical names 
from patent documents and show how this annotator can be easily modified with 
simple configuration alone.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-5913-3_7
PMID: 20865486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]