112. J Biomed Semantics. 2019 Nov 12;10(Suppl 1):24. doi: 10.1186/s13326-019-0215-3.

KLOSURE: Closing in on open-ended patient questionnaires with text mining.

SpasiÄ‡ I(1), Owen D(2), Smith A(3), Button K(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. 
SpasicI@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(3)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(4)School of Healthcare Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) is an instrument 
used to quantify patients' perceptions about their knee condition and associated 
problems. It is administered as a 42-item closed-ended questionnaire in which 
patients are asked to self-assess five outcomes: pain, other symptoms, 
activities of daily living, sport and recreation activities, and quality of 
life. We developed KLOG as a 10-item open-ended version of the KOOS 
questionnaire in an attempt to obtain deeper insight into patients' opinions 
including their unmet needs. However, the open-ended nature of the questionnaire 
incurs analytical overhead associated with the interpretation of responses. The 
goal of this study was to automate such analysis. We implemented KLOSURE as a 
system for mining free-text responses to the KLOG questionnaire. It consists of 
two subsystems, one concerned with feature extraction and the other one 
concerned with classification of feature vectors. Feature extraction is 
performed by a set of four modules whose main functionalities are linguistic 
pre-processing, sentiment analysis, named entity recognition and lexicon lookup 
respectively. Outputs produced by each module are combined into feature vectors. 
The structure of feature vectors will vary across the KLOG questions. Finally, 
Weka, a machine learning workbench, was used for classification of feature 
vectors.
RESULTS: The precision of the system varied between 62.8 and 95.3%, whereas the 
recall varied from 58.3 to 87.6% across the 10 questions. The overall 
performance in terms of F-measure varied between 59.0 and 91.3% with an average 
of 74.4% and a standard deviation of 8.8.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated the feasibility of mining open-ended patient 
questionnaires. By automatically mapping free text answers onto a Likert scale, 
we can effectively measure the progress of rehabilitation over time. In 
comparison to traditional closed-ended questionnaires, our approach offers much 
richer information that can be utilised to support clinical decision making. In 
conclusion, we demonstrated how text mining can be used to combine the benefits 
of qualitative and quantitative analysis of patient experiences.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-019-0215-3
PMCID: PMC6849171
PMID: 31711536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: To the best knowledge of the authors, there are 
no competing interests.