58. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 5;11(10):e0163794. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163794. 
eCollection 2016.

PubMedPortable: A Framework for Supporting the Development of Text Mining 
Applications.

Döring K(1), Grüning BA(2), Telukunta KK(2), Thomas P(3), Günther S(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Bioinformatics, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Albert-Ludwigs University, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Bioinformatics, Institute of Computer Science, Albert-Ludwigs University, 
79110 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Language Technology Lab, German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, 
DFKI GmbH, 10559 Berlin, Germany.

Information extraction from biomedical literature is continuously growing in 
scope and importance. Many tools exist that perform named entity recognition, 
e.g. of proteins, chemical compounds, and diseases. Furthermore, several 
approaches deal with the extraction of relations between identified entities. 
The BioCreative community supports these developments with yearly open 
challenges, which led to a standardised XML text annotation format called BioC. 
PubMed provides access to the largest open biomedical literature repository, but 
there is no unified way of connecting its data to natural language processing 
tools. Therefore, an appropriate data environment is needed as a basis to 
combine different software solutions and to develop customised text mining 
applications. PubMedPortable builds a relational database and a full text index 
on PubMed citations. It can be applied either to the complete PubMed data set or 
an arbitrary subset of downloaded PubMed XML files. The software provides the 
infrastructure to combine stand-alone applications by exporting different data 
formats, e.g. BioC. The presented workflows show how to use PubMedPortable to 
retrieve, store, and analyse a disease-specific data set. The provided use cases 
are well documented in the PubMedPortable wiki. The open-source software library 
is small, easy to use, and scalable to the user's system requirements. It is 
freely available for Linux on the web at 
https://github.com/KerstenDoering/PubMedPortable and for other operating systems 
as a virtual container. The approach was tested extensively and applied 
successfully in several projects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163794
PMCID: PMC5051953
PMID: 27706202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.