383. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Apr 12;7:18. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0060-6. 
eCollection 2016.

MicrO: an ontology of phenotypic and metabolic characters, assays, and culture 
media found in prokaryotic taxonomic descriptions.

Blank CE(1), Cui H(2), Moore LR(3), Walls RL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geosciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT 59812 USA.
(2)School of Information, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85719 USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern Maine, Portland, ME 
04104 USA.
(4)CyVerse, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA.

BACKGROUND: MicrO is an ontology of microbiological terms, including prokaryotic 
qualities and processes, material entities (such as cell components), chemical 
entities (such as microbiological culture media and medium ingredients), and 
assays. The ontology was built to support the ongoing development of a natural 
language processing algorithm, MicroPIE (or, Microbial Phenomics Information 
Extractor). During the MicroPIE design process, we realized there was a need for 
a prokaryotic ontology which would capture the evolutionary diversity of 
phenotypes and metabolic processes across the tree of life, capture the 
diversity of synonyms and information contained in the taxonomic literature, and 
relate microbiological entities and processes to terms in a large number of 
other ontologies, most particularly the Gene Ontology (GO), the Phenotypic 
Quality Ontology (PATO), and the Chemical Entities of Biological Interest 
(ChEBI). We thus constructed MicrO to be rich in logical axioms and synonyms 
gathered from the taxonomic literature.
RESULTS: MicrO currently has ~14550 classes (~2550 of which are new, the 
remainder being microbiologically-relevant classes imported from other 
ontologies), connected by ~24,130 logical axioms (5,446 of which are new), and 
is available at (http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/MicrO.owl) and on the project 
website at https://github.com/carrineblank/MicrO. MicrO has been integrated into 
the OBO Foundry Library (http://www.obofoundry.org/ontology/micro.html), so that 
other ontologies can borrow and re-use classes. Term requests and user feedback 
can be made using MicrO's Issue Tracker in GitHub. We designed MicrO such that 
it can support the ongoing and future development of algorithms that can 
leverage the controlled vocabulary and logical inference power provided by the 
ontology.
CONCLUSIONS: By connecting microbial classes with large numbers of chemical 
entities, material entities, biological processes, molecular functions, and 
qualities using a dense array of logical axioms, we intend MicrO to be a 
powerful new tool to increase the computing power of bioinformatics tools such 
as the automated text mining of prokaryotic taxonomic descriptions using natural 
language processing. We also intend MicrO to support the development of new 
bioinformatics tools that aim to develop new connections between microbial 
phenotypes and genotypes (i.e., the gene content in genomes). Future ontology 
development will include incorporation of pathogenic phenotypes and prokaryotic 
habitats.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0060-6
PMCID: PMC4830071
PMID: 27076900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]