548. Acad Med. 2014 Mar;89(3):399-403. doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000000149.

Simulated electronic health record (Sim-EHR) curriculum: teaching EHR skills and 
use of the EHR for disease management and prevention.

Milano CE(1), Hardman JA, Plesiu A, Rdesinski RE, Biagioli FE.

Author information:
(1)Dr. Milano is assistant professor, Department of Family Medicine, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon. Dr. Hardman is assistant 
professor, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
Oregon. Dr. Plesiu is an intern, Kettering Medical Center, Kettering, Ohio. Ms. 
Rdesinski is a research associate, Department of Family Medicine, Oregon Health 
& Science University, Portland, Oregon. Dr. Biagioli is associate professor, 
Department of Family Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
Oregon.

Electronic health records (EHRs) can improve many aspects of patient care, yet 
few formal EHR curricula exist to teach optimal use to students and other 
trainees. The Simulated EHR (Sim-EHR) curriculum was introduced in January 2011 
at Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU) to provide learners with a safe 
hands-on environment in which to apply evidence-based guidelines while learning 
EHR skills. Using an EHR training platform identical to the OHSU EHR system, 
learners review and correct a simulated medical chart for a complex virtual 
patient with chronic diseases and years of fragmented care. They write orders 
and prescriptions, create an evidence-based plan of care for indicated disease 
prevention and management, and review their work in a small-group setting. 
Third-year students complete the Sim-EHR curriculum as part of the required 
family medicine clerkship; their chart work is assessed using a rubric tied to 
the curriculum's general and specific objectives. As of January 2014, 406 
third-year OHSU medical students, on campus or at remote clerkship sites, and 21 
OHSU internal medicine interns had completed simulated charts.In this article, 
the authors describe the development and implementation of the Sim-EHR 
curriculum, with a focus on use of the curriculum in the family medicine 
clerkship. They also share preliminary findings and lessons learned. They 
suggest that the Sim-EHR curriculum is an effective, interactive method for 
providing learners with EHR skills education while demonstrating how a 
well-organized chart helps ensure safe, efficient, and quality patient care.

DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000000149
PMCID: PMC4035239
PMID: 24448035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]