617. J Biomed Inform. 2014 Dec;52:36-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.10.009. Epub 2013 
Oct 28.

Using aggregated, de-identified electronic health record data for multivariate 
pharmacosurveillance: a case study of azathioprine.

Patel VN(1), Kaelber DC(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical Informatics Research and Education, The MetroHealth 
System, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States; Center 
for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, The MetroHealth System, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, United States. Electronic address: 
vishal.patel2@case.edu.
(2)Center for Clinical Informatics Research and Education, The MetroHealth 
System, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States; 
Departments of Information Services, The MetroHealth System, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States; Department of Internal 
Medicine, The MetroHealth System, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, 
OH, United States; Department of Pediatrics, The MetroHealth System, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States; Departments of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, The MetroHealth System, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, United States.

OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the use of aggregated and de-identified electronic 
health record (EHR) data for multivariate post-marketing pharmacosurveillance in 
a case study of azathioprine (AZA).
METHODS: Using aggregated, standardized, normalized, and de-identified, 
population-level data from the Explore platform (Explorys, Inc.) we searched 
over 10 million individuals, of which 14,580 were prescribed AZA based on RxNorm 
drug orders. Based on logical observation identifiers names and codes (LOINC) 
and vital sign data, we examined the following side effects: anemia, cell lysis, 
fever, hepatotoxicity, hypertension, nephrotoxicity, neutropenia, and 
neutrophilia. Patients prescribed AZA were compared to patients prescribed one 
of 11 other anti-rheumatologic drugs to determine the relative risk of side 
effect pairs.
RESULTS: Compared to AZA case report trends, hepatotoxicity (marked by elevated 
transaminases or elevated bilirubin) did not occur as an isolated event more 
frequently in patients prescribed AZA than other anti-rheumatic agents. While 
neutropenia occurred in 24% of patients (RR 1.15, 95% CI 1.07-1.23), 
neutrophilia was also frequent (45%) and increased in patients prescribed AZA 
(RR 1.28, 95% CI 1.22-1.34). After constructing a pairwise side effect network, 
neutropenia had no dependencies. A reduced risk of neutropenia was found in 
patients with co-existing elevations in total bilirubin or liver transaminases, 
supporting classic clinical knowledge that agranulocytosis is a largely 
unpredictable phenomenon. Rounding errors propagated in the statistically 
de-identified datasets for cohorts as small as 40 patients only contributed 
marginally to the calculated risk.
CONCLUSION: Our work demonstrates that aggregated, standardized, normalized and 
de-identified population level EHR data can provide both sufficient insight and 
statistical power to detect potential patterns of medication side effect 
associations, serving as a multivariate and generalizable approach to 
post-marketing drug surveillance.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.10.009
PMCID: PMC4002671
PMID: 24177317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]