132. Database (Oxford). 2012 Nov 22;2012:bas037. doi: 10.1093/database/bas037. Print 
2012.

Collaborative biocuration--text-mining development task for document 
prioritization for curation.

Wiegers TC(1), Davis AP, Mattingly CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 
27695-7617, USA. tcwieger@ncsu.edu

The Critical Assessment of Information Extraction systems in Biology 
(BioCreAtIvE) challenge evaluation is a community-wide effort for evaluating 
text mining and information extraction systems for the biological domain. The 
'BioCreative Workshop 2012' subcommittee identified three areas, or tracks, that 
comprised independent, but complementary aspects of data curation in which they 
sought community input: literature triage (Track I); curation workflow (Track 
II) and text mining/natural language processing (NLP) systems (Track III). Track 
I participants were invited to develop tools or systems that would effectively 
triage and prioritize articles for curation and present results in a prototype 
web interface. Training and test datasets were derived from the Comparative 
Toxicogenomics Database (CTD; http://ctdbase.org) and consisted of manuscripts 
from which chemical-gene-disease data were manually curated. A total of seven 
groups participated in Track I. For the triage component, the effectiveness of 
participant systems was measured by aggregate gene, disease and chemical 
'named-entity recognition' (NER) across articles; the effectiveness of 
'information retrieval' (IR) was also measured based on 'mean average precision' 
(MAP). Top recall scores for gene, disease and chemical NER were 49, 65 and 82%, 
respectively; the top MAP score was 80%. Each participating group also developed 
a prototype web interface; these interfaces were evaluated based on 
functionality and ease-of-use by CTD's biocuration project manager. In this 
article, we present a detailed description of the challenge and a summary of the 
results.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bas037
PMCID: PMC3504477
PMID: 23180769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]