585. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2010;2010:3602-5. doi: 
10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627469.

PSYCHE: personalised monitoring systems for care in mental health.

Paradiso R(1), Bianchi AM, Lau K, Scilingo EP.

Author information:
(1)SMARTEX s.r.l, Prato, Italy. rita@smartex.it

One of the areas of great demand for the need of continuous monitoring, patient 
participation and medical prediction is that of mood disorders, more 
specifically bipolar disorders. Due to the unpredictable and episodic nature of 
bipolar disorder, it is necessary to take the traditional standard procedures of 
mood assessment through the administration of rating scales and questionnaires 
and integrate this with tangible data found in emerging research on central and 
peripheral changes in brain function that may be associated to the clinical 
status and response to treatment throughout the course of bipolar disorder. This 
paper presents PSYCHE system, a personal, cost-effective, multi-parametric 
monitoring system based on textile platforms and portable sensing devices for 
the long term and short term acquisition of data from selected class of patients 
affected by mood disorders. The acquired data will be processed and analyzed in 
the established platform that takes into account the Electronic Health Records 
(EHR) of the patient, a personalized data referee system, as well as medical 
analysis in order to verify the diagnosis and help in prognosis of the illness. 
Constant feedback and monitoring will be used to manage the illness, to give 
patients support, to facilitate interaction between patient and physician as 
well as to alert professionals in case of patients relapse and depressive or 
manic episodes income, as the ultimate goal is to identify signal trends 
indicating detection and prediction of critical events.

DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627469
PMID: 21096841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]