472. Bioinformatics. 2006 Jun 1;22(11):1383-90. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl081. 
Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Graph-based analysis and visualization of experimental results with ONDEX.

Köhler J(1), Baumbach J, Taubert J, Specht M, Skusa A, Rüegg A, Rawlings C, 
Verrier P, Philippi S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomathematics and Bioinformatics, Rothamsted Research, AL5 2JQ 
Harpenden, UK. Jacob.Koehler@bbsrc.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: Assembling the relevant information needed to interpret the output 
from high-throughput, genome scale, experiments such as gene expression 
microarrays is challenging. Analysis reveals genes that show statistically 
significant changes in expression levels, but more information is needed to 
determine their biological relevance. The challenge is to bring these genes 
together with biological information distributed across hundreds of databases or 
buried in the scientific literature (millions of articles). Software tools are 
needed to automate this task which at present is labor-intensive and requires 
considerable informatics and biological expertise.
RESULTS: This article describes ONDEX and how it can be applied to the task of 
interpreting gene expression results. ONDEX is a database system that combines 
the features of semantic database integration and text mining with methods for 
graph-based analysis. An overview of the ONDEX system is presented, 
concentrating on recently developed features for graph-based analysis and 
visualization. A case study is used to show how ONDEX can help to identify 
causal relationships between stress response genes and metabolic pathways from 
gene expression data. ONDEX also discovered functional annotations for most of 
the genes that emerged as significant in the microarray experiment, but were 
previously of unknown function.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl081
PMID: 16533819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]