627. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;17(1-2):1-14. doi: 
10.3109/21678421.2015.1047455. Epub 2015 May 22.

State of the field: An informatics-based systematic review of the SOD1-G93A 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis transgenic mouse model.

Kim RB(1), Irvin CW(1), Tilva KR(1), Mitchell CS(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biomedical Engineering , Georgia Institute of Technology & 
Emory University , Atlanta , Georgia , USA.

Numerous sub-cellular through system-level disturbances have been identified in 
over 1300 articles examining the superoxide dismutase-1 guanine 93 to alanine 
(SOD1-G93A) transgenic mouse amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
pathophysiology. Manual assessment of such a broad literature base is daunting. 
We performed a comprehensive informatics-based systematic review or 'field 
analysis' to agnostically compute and map the current state of the field. Text 
mining of recaptured articles was used to quantify published data topic breadth 
and frequency. We constructed a nine-category pathophysiological function-based 
ontology to systematically organize and quantify the field's primary data. 
Results demonstrated that the distribution of primary research belonging to each 
category is: systemic measures an motor function, 59%; inflammation, 46%; 
cellular energetics, 37%; proteomics, 31%; neural excitability, 22%; apoptosis, 
20%; oxidative stress, 18%; aberrant cellular chemistry, 14%; axonal transport, 
10%. We constructed a SOD1-G93A field map that visually illustrates and 
categorizes the 85% most frequently assessed sub-topics. Finally, we present the 
literature-cited significance of frequently published terms and uncover thinly 
investigated areas. In conclusion, most articles individually examine at least 
two categories, which is indicative of the numerous underlying 
pathophysiological interrelationships. An essential future path is examination 
of cross-category pathophysiological interrelationships and their 
co-correspondence to homeostatic regulation and disease progression.

DOI: 10.3109/21678421.2015.1047455
PMCID: PMC4724331
PMID: 25998063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]