17. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2019 Aug 9;265:207-212. doi: 10.3233/SHTI190165.

Open or Closed: A Project Proposal for Investigating Two Different EHR Platform 
Approaches.

Malm-Nicolaisen K(1)(2), Pedersen R(1)(2), Fagerlund AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Centre for E-health Research.
(2)Telemedicine and E-health Research Group, The Arctic University of Norway.

Technical platforms form the fundament on which IT systems and Electronic Health 
Records (EHRs) are implemented. The use of either open or proprietary standards 
and technologies for information modelling and interoperability have 
implications for how clinical and health data is handled and made available for 
the system users. In Norway, two different EHRs are procured in different health 
regions of the Specialist healthcare service. The two platforms are 
characterized as one being open platform-based and the other being closed 
platform-based. The study aims to identify and describe consequences and 
implications related to two different platform approaches for EHRs from an 
end-user perspective. The study will employ three methods of data capturing; 
scoping study, interviews, and questionnaires. Data will be systematically 
analyzed through proven methods. Interviews and questionnaire data will be 
gathered from European hospitals having implemented EHRs in recent years. 
Results will be compared to the Norwegian context. The technical platform used 
for health IT systems in general, and the EHR specifically, can have substantial 
consequences for clinicians and organization of work. Closed platform-based EHRs 
still constitutes the majority of the market, but open platform approaches are 
rapidly gaining popularity. An assessment of the consequences related to 
different platform designs can shed light on the implications the chosen 
technical approach will have on clinical and organizational practice.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI190165
PMID: 31431600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]