616. Circulation. 2010 Nov 16;122(20):2016-21. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.948828. Epub 2010 Nov 1.

Identification of genomic predictors of atrioventricular conduction: using 
electronic medical records as a tool for genome science.

Denny JC(1), Ritchie MD, Crawford DC, Schildcrout JS, Ramirez AH, Pulley JM, 
Basford MA, Masys DR, Haines JL, Roden DM.

Author information:
(1)Office of Personalized Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN 37232-0575, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies in which selected community 
populations are used have identified genomic signals in SCN10A influencing PR 
duration. The extent to which this can be demonstrated in cohorts derived from 
electronic medical records is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a genome-wide association study on 2334 
European American patients with normal ECGs without evidence of prior heart 
disease from the Vanderbilt DNA databank, BioVU, which accrues subjects from 
routine patient care. Subjects were identified by combinations of natural 
language processing, laboratory queries, and billing code queries of 
deidentified medical record data. Subjects were 58% female, of mean (± SD) age 
54 ± 15 years, and had mean PR intervals of 158 ± 18 ms. Genotyping was 
performed with the use of the Illumina Human660W-Quad platform. Our results 
identify 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs6800541, rs6795970, rs6798015, 
rs7430477) linked to SCN10A associated with PR interval (P=5.73 × 10(-7) to 1.78 
× 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: This genome-wide association study confirms a gene heretofore not 
implicated in cardiac pathophysiology as a modulator of PR interval in humans. 
This study is one of the first replication genome-wide association studies 
performed with the use of an electronic medical records-derived cohort, 
supporting their further use for genotype-phenotype analyses.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.948828
PMCID: PMC2991609
PMID: 21041692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures The authors 
have no conflicts of interest.