431. Comput Syst Bioinformatics Conf. 2007;6:381-4. doi: 10.1142/9781860948732_0038.

CBioC: beyond a prototype for collaborative annotation of molecular interactions 
from the literature.

Baral C(1), Gonzalez G, Gitter A, Teegarden C, Zeigler A, Joshi-Top√© G.

Author information:
(1)School of Computing and Informatics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 
85281, USA. chitta@asu.edu

In molecular biology research, looking for information on a particular entity 
such as a gene or a protein may lead to thousands of articles, making it 
impossible for a researcher to individually read these articles and even just 
their abstracts. Thus, there is a need to curate the literature to get various 
nuggets of knowledge, such as an interaction between two proteins, and store 
them in a database. However the body of existing biomedical articles is growing 
at a very fast rate, making it impossible to curate them manually. An 
alternative approach of using computers for automatic extraction has problem 
with accuracy. We propose to leverage the advantages of both techniques, 
extracting binary relationships between biological entities automatically from 
the biomedical literature and providing a platform that allows community 
collaboration in the annotation of the extracted relationships. Thus, the 
community of researchers that writes and reads the biomedical texts can use the 
server for searching our database of extracted facts, and as an easy-to-use web 
platform to annotate facts relevant to them. We presented a preliminary 
prototype as a proof of concept earlier(1). This paper presents the working 
implementation available for download at http://www.cbioc.org as a browser-plug 
in for both Internet Explorer and FireFox. This current version has been 
available since June of 2006, and has over 160 registered users from around the 
world. Aside from its use as an annotation tool, data from CBioC has also been 
used in computational methods with encouraging results.

DOI: 10.1142/9781860948732_0038
PMID: 17951840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]