630. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2011;166:180-8.

Three different cases of exploiting decision support services for adverse drug 
event prevention.

Bernonille S(1), Nies J, Pedersen HG, Guillot B, Maazi M, Berg AL, Sarfati JC, 
Koutkias V.

Author information:
(1)CHU Lille, UDSL EA2694, Univ Lille Nord de France F-59000 Lille, France. 
stephanie.bernonville@univ-lille2.fr

Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSSs) are implemented in clinical settings 
in order to improve patient outcomes and/or clinical practices. However, they 
are still not widely accepted by healthcare professionals due to over-alerting. 
The aim of the "Patient Safety through Intelligent Procedures in medication" 
(PSIP) project is to develop and demonstrate innovative tools so as to generate 
and provide relevant knowledge to healthcare professionals and patients for 
Adverse Drug Event (ADE) prevention by means of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT). PSIP employs a Knowledge Base (KB) as the core of its CDSS. 
This KB encapsulates signals capable of automatically detecting potential ADEs 
and contextualizing the CDSS output to the patient and healthcare professionals. 
To exploit the KB, a Global Knowledge Platform (GKP) has been created comprising 
of a KB system, a Connectivity Platform and appropriate user interface modules. 
The GKP has been tested to demonstrate integration of the KB in different work 
situations and it has been deployed in three different medical applications. The 
first is a Web application; the second involves a commercial French EHR 
(Electronic Health Record) and the third is a Danish CPOE (Computerised 
Physician Order Entry) system. This paper presents recent progress as regards 
the exploitation of the PSIP KB and the results obtained in the three different 
medical applications.

PMID: 21685623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]