201. Bioinformatics. 2010 Jun 15;26(12):i382-90. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq180.

Complex event extraction at PubMed scale.

Bj√∂rne J(1), Ginter F, Pyysalo S, Tsujii J, Salakoski T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Technology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. 
jari.bjorne@utu.fi

MOTIVATION: There has recently been a notable shift in biomedical information 
extraction (IE) from relation models toward the more expressive event model, 
facilitated by the maturation of basic tools for biomedical text analysis and 
the availability of manually annotated resources. The event model allows 
detailed representation of complex natural language statements and can support a 
number of advanced text mining applications ranging from semantic search to 
pathway extraction. A recent collaborative evaluation demonstrated the potential 
of event extraction systems, yet there have so far been no studies of the 
generalization ability of the systems nor the feasibility of large-scale 
extraction.
RESULTS: This study considers event-based IE at PubMed scale. We introduce a 
system combining publicly available, state-of-the-art methods for domain 
parsing, named entity recognition and event extraction, and test the system on a 
representative 1% sample of all PubMed citations. We present the first 
evaluation of the generalization performance of event extraction systems to this 
scale and show that despite its computational complexity, event extraction from 
the entire PubMed is feasible. We further illustrate the value of the extraction 
approach through a number of analyses of the extracted information.
AVAILABILITY: The event detection system and extracted data are open source 
licensed and available at http://bionlp.utu.fi/.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq180
PMCID: PMC2881365
PMID: 20529932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]