183. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:254838. doi: 10.1155/2015/254838. Epub 2015 Oct 1.

METSP: a maximum-entropy classifier based text mining tool for 
transporter-substrate identification with semistructured text.

Zhao M(1), Chen Y(2), Qu D(2), Qu H(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Engineering, Faculty of Science, Health, Education and Engineering, 
University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, QLD 4558, Australia.
(2)School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, 
Beijing 100081, China.
(3)Center for Bioinformatics, State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene 
Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

The substrates of a transporter are not only useful for inferring function of 
the transporter, but also important to discover compound-compound interaction 
and to reconstruct metabolic pathway. Though plenty of data has been accumulated 
with the developing of new technologies such as in vitro transporter assays, the 
search for substrates of transporters is far from complete. In this article, we 
introduce METSP, a maximum-entropy classifier devoted to retrieve 
transporter-substrate pairs (TSPs) from semistructured text. Based on the high 
quality annotation from UniProt, METSP achieves high precision and recall in 
cross-validation experiments. When METSP is applied to 182,829 human transporter 
annotation sentences in UniProt, it identifies 3942 sentences with transporter 
and compound information. Finally, 1547 confidential human TSPs are identified 
for further manual curation, among which 58.37% pairs with novel substrates not 
annotated in public transporter databases. METSP is the first efficient tool to 
extract TSPs from semistructured annotation text in UniProt. This tool can help 
to determine the precise substrates and drugs of transporters, thus facilitating 
drug-target prediction, metabolic network reconstruction, and literature 
classification.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/254838
PMCID: PMC4606149
PMID: 26495291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]