189. BMC Bioinformatics. 2017 Oct 13;18(1):451. doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-1857-8.

A method for named entity normalization in biomedical articles: application to 
diseases and plants.

Cho H(1), Choi W(1), Lee H(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Gwangju Institute of 
Science and Technology, 123 Chemdangwagi-ro, Buk-gu, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Gwangju Institute of 
Science and Technology, 123 Chemdangwagi-ro, Buk-gu, Gwangju, Republic of Korea. 
hyunjulee@gist.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: In biomedical articles, a named entity recognition (NER) technique 
that identifies entity names from texts is an important element for extracting 
biological knowledge from articles. After NER is applied to articles, the next 
step is to normalize the identified names into standard concepts (i.e., disease 
names are mapped to the National Library of Medicine's Medical Subject Headings 
disease terms). In biomedical articles, many entity normalization methods rely 
on domain-specific dictionaries for resolving synonyms and abbreviations. 
However, the dictionaries are not comprehensive except for some entities such as 
genes. In recent years, biomedical articles have accumulated rapidly, and neural 
network-based algorithms that incorporate a large amount of unlabeled data have 
shown considerable success in several natural language processing problems.
RESULTS: In this study, we propose an approach for normalizing biological 
entities, such as disease names and plant names, by using word embeddings to 
represent semantic spaces. For diseases, training data from the National Center 
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) disease corpus and unlabeled data from 
PubMed abstracts were used to construct word representations. For plants, a 
training corpus that we manually constructed and unlabeled PubMed abstracts were 
used to represent word vectors. We showed that the proposed approach performed 
better than the use of only the training corpus or only the unlabeled data and 
showed that the normalization accuracy was improved by using our model even when 
the dictionaries were not comprehensive. We obtained F-scores of 0.808 and 0.690 
for normalizing the NCBI disease corpus and manually constructed plant corpus, 
respectively. We further evaluated our approach using a data set in the disease 
normalization task of the BioCreative V challenge. When only the disease corpus 
was used as a dictionary, our approach significantly outperformed the best 
system of the task.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed approach shows robust performance for normalizing 
biological entities. The manually constructed plant corpus and the proposed 
model are available at http://gcancer.org/plant and 
http://gcancer.org/normalization , respectively.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-017-1857-8
PMCID: PMC5640957
PMID: 29029598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.