230. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2014;198:125-32.

An Arden-Syntax-based clinical decision support framework for medical 
guidelines--Lyme borreliosis as an example.

Seitinger A(1), Fehre K(2), Adlassnig KP(2), Rappelsberger A(3), Wurm E(1), 
Aberer E(4), Binder M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Division of General Dermatology, Medical 
University of Vienna, Austria.
(2)Medexter Healthcare GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Section for Medical Expert and Knowledge-Based Systems, Center for Medical 
Statistics, Informatics, and Intelligent Systems, Medical University of Vienna, 
Austria.
(4)Department of Environmental Dermatology and Venereology, Medical University 
Graz, Austria.

Medicine is evolving at a very fast pace. The overwhelming quantity of new data 
compels the practician to be consistently informed about the most recent 
scientific advances. While medical guidelines have proven to be an acceptable 
tool for bringing new medical knowledge into clinical practice and also support 
medical personnel, reading them may be rather time-consuming. Clinical decision 
support systems have been developed to simplify this process. However, the 
implementation or adaptation of such systems for individual guidelines involves 
substantial effort. This paper introduces a clinical decision support platform 
that uses Arden Syntax to implement medical guidelines using client-server 
architecture. It provides a means of implementing different guidelines without 
the need for adapting the system's source code. To implement a prototype, three 
Lyme borreliosis guidelines were aggregated and a knowledge base created. The 
prototype employs transfer objects to represent any text-based medical 
guideline. As part of the implementation, we show how Fuzzy Arden Syntax can 
improve the overall usability of a clinical decision support system.

PMID: 24825694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]