151. J Biomed Inform. 2010 Apr;43(2):173-89. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2009.11.001. Epub 
2009 Nov 10.

Beyond genes, proteins, and abstracts: Identifying scientific claims from 
full-text biomedical articles.

Blake C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana 
Champaign, Champaign, IL 61820-3302, USA. clblake@illinois.edu

Massive increases in electronically available text have spurred a variety of 
natural language processing methods to automatically identify relationships from 
text; however, existing annotated collections comprise only bioinformatics 
(gene-protein) or clinical informatics (treatment-disease) relationships. This 
paper introduces the Claim Framework that reflects how authors across biomedical 
spectrum communicate findings in empirical studies. The Framework captures 
different levels of evidence by differentiating between explicit and implicit 
claims, and by capturing under-specified claims such as correlations, 
comparisons, and observations. The results from 29 full-text articles show that 
authors report fewer than 7.84% of scientific claims in an abstract, thus 
revealing the urgent need for text mining systems to consider the full-text of 
an article rather than just the abstract. The results also show that authors 
typically report explicit claims (77.12%) rather than an observations (9.23%), 
correlations (5.39%), comparisons (5.11%) or implicit claims (2.7%). Informed by 
the initial manual annotations, we introduce an automated approach that uses 
syntax and semantics to identify explicit claims automatically and measure the 
degree to which each feature contributes to the overall precision and recall. 
Results show that a combination of semantics and syntax is required to achieve 
the best system performance.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2009.11.001
PMID: 19900574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]