195. Genomics Inform. 2019 Jun;17(2):e17. doi: 10.5808/GI.2019.17.2.e17. Epub 2019 
Jun 26.

OryzaGP: rice gene and protein dataset for named-entity recognition.

Larmande P(1)(2), Do H(2), Wang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)UMR DIADE, Institute of Research for Sustainable Development (IRD), F-34394 
Montpellier, France.
(2)ICT Lab, University of Science and Technology of Hanoi (USTH), 100000 Hanoi, 
Vietnam.
(3)Database Center for Life Science (DBCLS), Chiba 277-0871, Japan.

Text mining has become an important research method in biology, with its 
original purpose to extract biological entities, such as genes, proteins and 
phenotypic traits, to extend knowledge from scientific papers. However, few 
thorough studies on text mining and application development, for plant molecular 
biology data, have been performed, especially for rice, resulting in a lack of 
datasets available to solve named-entity recognition tasks for this species. 
Since there are rare benchmarks available for rice, we faced various 
difficulties in exploiting advanced machine learning methods for accurate 
analysis of the rice literature. To evaluate several approaches to automatically 
extract information from gene/protein entities, we built a new dataset for rice 
as a benchmark. This dataset is composed of a set of titles and abstracts, 
extracted from scientific papers focusing on the rice species, and is downloaded 
from PubMed. During the 5th Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon, a portion of 
the dataset was uploaded to PubAnnotation for sharing. Our ultimate goal is to 
offer a shared task of rice gene/protein name recognition through the BioNLP 
Open Shared Tasks framework using the dataset, to facilitate an open comparison 
and evaluation of different approaches to the task.

DOI: 10.5808/GI.2019.17.2.e17
PMCID: PMC6808627
PMID: 31307132

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.