7. Health Informatics J. 2020 Mar;26(1):388-405. doi: 10.1177/1460458218824742. 
Epub 2019 Feb 22.

Natural language processing of lifestyle modification documentation.

Shoenbill K(1), Song Y, Gress L, Johnson H, Smith M, Mendonca EA(2).

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(2)University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

Lifestyle modification, including diet, exercise, and tobacco cessation, is the 
first-line treatment of many disorders including hypertension, obesity, and 
diabetes. Lifestyle modification data are not easily retrieved or used in 
research due to their textual nature. This study addresses this knowledge gap 
using natural language processing to automatically identify lifestyle 
modification documentation from electronic health records. Electronic health 
record notes from hypertension patients were analyzed using an open-source 
natural language processing tool to retrieve assessment and advice regarding 
lifestyle modification. These data were classified as lifestyle modification 
assessment or advice and mapped to a coded standard ontology. Combined lifestyle 
modification (advice and assessment) recall was 99.27 percent, precision 
94.44 percent, and correct classification 88.15 percent. Through extraction and 
transformation of narrative lifestyle modification data to coded data, this 
critical information can be used in research, metric development, and quality 
improvement efforts regarding care delivery for multiple medical conditions that 
benefit from lifestyle modification.

DOI: 10.1177/1460458218824742
PMCID: PMC6722039
PMID: 30791802

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.