64. J Thorac Dis. 2016 Aug;8(Suppl 8):S637-41. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2016.08.44.

Hospital information systems: experience at the fully digitized Seoul National 
University Bundang Hospital.

Yoo S(1), Hwang H(1), Jheon S(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Informatics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Korea.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Korea.

The different levels of health information technology (IT) adoption and its 
integration into hospital workflow can affect the maximization of the benefits 
of using of health IT. We aimed at sharing our experiences and the journey to 
the successful adoption of health IT over 13 years at a tertiary university 
hospital in South Korea. The integrated system of comprehensive applications for 
direct care, support care, and smart care has been implemented with the latest 
IT and a rich user information platform, achieving the fully digitized hospital. 
The users experience design methodology, barcode and radio-frequency 
identification (RFID) technologies, smartphone and mobile technologies, and data 
analytics were integrated into hospital workflow. Applications for user-centered 
electronic medical record (EMR) and clinical decision support (CDS), closed loop 
medication administration (CLMA), mobile EMR and dashboard system for care 
coordination, clinical data warehouse (CDW) system, and patient engagement 
solutions were designed and developed to improve quality of care, work 
efficiency, and patient safety. We believe that comprehensive electronic health 
record systems and patient-centered smart hospital applications will go a long 
way in ensuring seamless patient care and experience.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2016.08.44
PMCID: PMC5009069
PMID: 27651940

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.