271. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Jun 6;16:185. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0609-x.

Text mining facilitates database curation - extraction of mutation-disease 
associations from Bio-medical literature.

Ravikumar KE(1), Wagholikar KB(2), Li D(3), Kocher JP(4), Liu H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 
First St SW, Harvick 3rd, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. 
KomandurElayavilli.Ravikumar@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 
First St SW, Harvick 3rd, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. 
Wagholikar.Kavishwar@mayo.edu.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 
First St SW, Harvick 3rd, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Li.DingCheng@mayo.edu.
(4)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 
First St SW, Harvick 3rd, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Kocher.Jeanpierre@mayo.edu.
(5)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 
First St SW, Harvick 3rd, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Liu.Hongfang@mayo.edu.

Erratum in
    BMC Bioinformatics. 2016;17(1):162.

BACKGROUND: Advances in the next generation sequencing technology has 
accelerated the pace of individualized medicine (IM), which aims to incorporate 
genetic/genomic information into medicine. One immediate need in interpreting 
sequencing data is the assembly of information about genetic variants and their 
corresponding associations with other entities (e.g., diseases or medications). 
Even with dedicated effort to capture such information in biological databases, 
much of this information remains 'locked' in the unstructured text of biomedical 
publications. There is a substantial lag between the publication and the 
subsequent abstraction of such information into databases. Multiple text mining 
systems have been developed, but most of them focus on the sentence level 
association extraction with performance evaluation based on gold standard text 
annotations specifically prepared for text mining systems.
RESULTS: We developed and evaluated a text mining system, MutD, which extracts 
protein mutation-disease associations from MEDLINE abstracts by incorporating 
discourse level analysis, using a benchmark data set extracted from curated 
database records. MutD achieves an F-measure of 64.3% for reconstructing protein 
mutation disease associations in curated database records. Discourse level 
analysis component of MutD contributed to a gain of more than 10% in F-measure 
when compared against the sentence level association extraction. Our error 
analysis indicates that 23 of the 64 precision errors are true associations that 
were not captured by database curators and 68 of the 113 recall errors are 
caused by the absence of associated disease entities in the abstract. After 
adjusting for the defects in the curated database, the revised F-measure of MutD 
in association detection reaches 81.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: Our quantitative analysis reveals that MutD can effectively extract 
protein mutation disease associations when benchmarking based on curated 
database records. The analysis also demonstrates that incorporating discourse 
level analysis significantly improved the performance of extracting the 
protein-mutation-disease association. Future work includes the extension of MutD 
for full text articles.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-015-0609-x
PMCID: PMC4457984
PMID: 26047637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]