236. Biometals. 2010 Jun;23(3):453-63. doi: 10.1007/s10534-010-9311-7. Epub 2010 Mar 
2.

A preliminary approach to creating an overview of lactoferrin 
multi-functionality utilizing a text mining method.

Shimazaki K(1), Kushida T.

Author information:
(1)Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan. simazaki@anim.agr.hokudai.ac.jp

Lactoferrin is a multi-functional metal-binding glycoprotein that exhibits many 
biological functions of interest to many researchers from the fields of clinical 
medicine, dentistry, pharmacology, veterinary medicine, nutrition and milk 
science. To date, a number of academic reports concerning the biological 
activities of lactoferrin have been published and are easily accessible through 
public data repositories. However, as the literature is expanding daily, this 
presents challenges in understanding the larger picture of lactoferrin function 
and mechanisms. In order to overcome the "analysis paralysis" associated with 
lactoferrin information, we attempted to apply a text mining method to the 
accumulated lactoferrin literature. To this end, we used the information 
extraction system GENPAC (provided by Nalapro Technologies Inc., Tokyo). This 
information extraction system uses natural language processing and text mining 
technology. This system analyzes the sentences and titles from abstracts stored 
in the PubMed database, and can automatically extract binary relations that 
consist of interactions between genes/proteins, chemicals and 
diseases/functions. We expect that such information visualization analysis will 
be useful in determining novel relationships among a multitude of lactoferrin 
functions and mechanisms. We have demonstrated the utilization of this method to 
find pathways of lactoferrin participation in neovascularization, Helicobacter 
pylori attack on gastric mucosa, atopic dermatitis and lipid metabolism.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-010-9311-7
PMID: 20195886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]