231. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:560296. doi: 10.1155/2014/560296. Epub 2014 
Apr 1.

OntoTrader: an ontological Web trading agent approach for environmental 
information retrieval.

Iribarne L(1), Padilla N(1), Ayala R(1), Asensio JA(1), Criado J(1).

Author information:
(1)Applied Computing Group, Department of Informatics, University of Almeria, 
04120 Almer√≠a, Spain.

Modern Web-based Information Systems (WIS) are becoming increasingly necessary 
to provide support for users who are in different places with different types of 
information, by facilitating their access to the information, decision making, 
workgroups, and so forth. Design of these systems requires the use of 
standardized methods and techniques that enable a common vocabulary to be 
defined to represent the underlying knowledge. Thus, mediation elements such as 
traders enrich the interoperability of web components in open distributed 
systems. These traders must operate with other third-party traders and/or agents 
in the system, which must also use a common vocabulary for communication between 
them. This paper presents the OntoTrader architecture, an Ontological Web 
Trading agent based on the OMG ODP trading standard. It also presents the 
ontology needed by some system agents to communicate with the trading agent and 
the behavioral framework for the SOLERES OntoTrader agent, an Environmental 
Management Information System (EMIS). This framework implements a 
"Query-Searching/Recovering-Response" information retrieval model using a 
trading service, SPARQL notation, and the JADE platform. The paper also presents 
reflection, delegation and, federation mediation models and describes 
formalization, an experimental testing environment in three scenarios, and a 
tool which allows our proposal to be evaluated and validated.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/560296
PMCID: PMC3995108
PMID: 24977211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]