172. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Jun;55:206-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.04.006. Epub 2015 
Apr 24.

Toward a complete dataset of drug-drug interaction information from publicly 
available sources.

Ayvaz S(1), Horn J(2), Hassanzadeh O(3), Zhu Q(4), Stan J(5), Tatonetti NP(6), 
Vilar S(7), Brochhausen M(8), Samwald M(9), Rastegar-Mojarad M(10), Dumontier 
M(11), Boyce RD(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Kent State University, 241 Math and Computer 
Science Building, Kent, OH 44242, USA. Electronic address: sayvaz1@kent.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy and University of Washington 
Medicine, Pharmacy Services, University of Washington, H375V Health Sciences 
Bldg, Box 357630, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: jrhorn@uw.edu.
(3)IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Rd Route 134, P.O. Box 218, 
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA. Electronic address: hassanzadeh@us.ibm.com.
(4)Department of Information Systems, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA. Electronic address: qianzhu@umbc.edu.
(5)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library 
of Medicine, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. Electronic address: 
johann.stan.phd@gmail.com.
(6)Departments of Biomedical Informatics, Systems Biology, and Medicine, 
Columbia University, 622 West 168th St VC5, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic 
address: nick.tatonetti@columbia.edu.
(7)Departments of Biomedical Informatics, Systems Biology, and Medicine, 
Columbia University, 622 West 168th St VC5, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic 
address: sav7003@dbmi.columbia.edu.
(8)Division of Biomedical Informatics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, 4301 W. Markham St, #782, Little Rock, AR 72205-7199, USA. Electronic 
address: mbrochhausen@uams.edu.
(9)Section for Medical Expert and Knowledge-Based Systems, Center for Medical 
Statistics, Informatics, and Intelligent Systems, Medical University of Vienna, 
Spitalgasse 23, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
matthias.samwald@meduniwien.ac.at.
(10)Biomedical Statistics & Informatics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address: Mojarad.Majid@mayo.edu.
(11)Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA. Electronic address: michel.dumontier@stanford.edu.
(12)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Suite 419, 5607 Baum Blvd, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15206-3701, USA. Electronic address: rdb20@pitt.edu.

Although potential drug-drug interactions (PDDIs) are a significant source of 
preventable drug-related harm, there is currently no single complete source of 
PDDI information. In the current study, all publically available sources of PDDI 
information that could be identified using a comprehensive and broad search were 
combined into a single dataset. The combined dataset merged fourteen different 
sources including 5 clinically-oriented information sources, 4 Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) Corpora, and 5 Bioinformatics/Pharmacovigilance information 
sources. As a comprehensive PDDI source, the merged dataset might benefit the 
pharmacovigilance text mining community by making it possible to compare the 
representativeness of NLP corpora for PDDI text extraction tasks, and specifying 
elements that can be useful for future PDDI extraction purposes. An analysis of 
the overlap between and across the data sources showed that there was little 
overlap. Even comprehensive PDDI lists such as DrugBank, KEGG, and the NDF-RT 
had less than 50% overlap with each other. Moreover, all of the comprehensive 
lists had incomplete coverage of two data sources that focus on PDDIs of 
interest in most clinical settings. Based on this information, we think that 
systems that provide access to the comprehensive lists, such as APIs into 
RxNorm, should be careful to inform users that the lists may be incomplete with 
respect to PDDIs that drug experts suggest clinicians be aware of. In spite of 
the low degree of overlap, several dozen cases were identified where PDDI 
information provided in drug product labeling might be augmented by the merged 
dataset. Moreover, the combined dataset was also shown to improve the 
performance of an existing PDDI NLP pipeline and a recently published PDDI 
pharmacovigilance protocol. Future work will focus on improvement of the methods 
for mapping between PDDI information sources, identifying methods to improve the 
use of the merged dataset in PDDI NLP algorithms, integrating high-quality PDDI 
information from the merged dataset into Wikidata, and making the combined 
dataset accessible as Semantic Web Linked Data.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.04.006
PMCID: PMC4464899
PMID: 25917055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]