331. Oncol Rep. 2012 Oct;28(4):1249-56. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1955. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

A predicted miR-27a-mediated network identifies a signature of glioma.

Yang S(1), Wang K, Qian C, Song Z, Pu P, Zhang A, Wang W, Niu H, Li X, Qi X, Zhu 
Y, Wang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Medical College, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310016, PR China.

The dysregulation of physiological microRNA (miRNA) activity has been shown to 
play an important role in gliomagenesis. In a previous study, using microRNA 
arrays and glioma tissues found that miR-27a was upregulated, which was also 
identified in the glioma cell lines and samples by quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). In this study, in order to explore the 
potential roles of miR-27a in the progression of glioma, we first utilized 
text-mining of PubMed abstracts with natural language processing (NLP) to 
identify 1,168 glioma-related molecules. In addition, miR-27a targets predicted 
by computational methods were integrated with the results from NLP analysis, 
followed by Gene Ontology (GO), pathway and network analysis. We identified 
33 hub genes by overlap calculation and demonstrated that miR-27a may be 
involved in the progression of glioma through adherens junction, focal adhesion, 
the neurotrophin signaling pathway, the MAPK signaling pathway, the transforming 
growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor 
interactions, the p53 signaling pathway, the apoptotic signaling pathway, as 
well as others. Our data may provide researchers with a better understanding of 
the mechanisms of the miR-27a-target network in glioma initiation and 
progression.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2012.1955
PMID: 22895821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]