374. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2020 May 7;20(1):107. doi: 10.1186/s12874-020-00993-1.

Association between antipsychotic drug dose and length of clinical notes: a 
proxy of disease severity?

SÃ¸rup FKH(1), Brunak S(1), Eriksson R(2).

Author information:
(1)Disease Systems Biology program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein 
Research, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200, Copenhagen N, 
Denmark.
(2)Disease Systems Biology program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein 
Research, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200, Copenhagen N, 
Denmark. robert.eriksson@cpr.ku.dk.

BACKGROUND: Most structured clinical data, such as diagnosis codes, are not 
sufficient to obtain precise phenotypes and assess disease burden. Text mining 
of clinical notes could provide a basis for detailed profiles of phenotypic 
traits. The objective of the current study was to determine whether drug dose, 
regardless of polypharmacy, is associated with the length of clinical notes, and 
to determine the frequency of adverse events per word in clinical notes.
METHODS: In this observational study, we utilized restricted-access data from an 
electronic patient record system. Using three methods (defined daily dose, 
olanzapine equivalents, and chlorpromazine equivalents) we calculated 
antipsychotic dose equivalents and compared these with the number of words 
recorded per treatment day. For each normalization method, the frequencies of 
adverse events per word in manually curated samples were compared to dose 
intervals.
RESULTS: The length of clinical notes per treatment day was positively 
associated with the prescribed dose for all normalization methods. The number of 
adverse events per word was stable over the analyzed dose spectrum.
CONCLUSIONS: Assuming that drug dose increases with the severity of disease, the 
length of clinical notes can serve as a proxy for disease severity. Due to the 
near-linear relationship, correction of daily word count is unnecessary when 
text mining for potential adverse drug reactions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12874-020-00993-1
PMCID: PMC7204249
PMID: 32381026

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest.