469. J Chem Inf Model. 2020 Jul 16:acs.jcim.0c00420. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00420. 
Online ahead of print.

Bioactivity Profile Similarities to Expand the Repertoire of COVID-19 Drugs.

Duran-Frigola M(1), Bertoni M(1), Blanco R(2), Martínez V(2), Pauls E(1), 
Alcalde V(1), Turon G(1), Villegas N(1), Fernández-Torras A(1), Pons C(1), Mateo 
L(1), Guitart-Pla O(1), Badia-I-Mompel P(1), Gimeno A(1), Soler N(1), Brun-Heath 
I(1), Zaragoza H(2), Aloy P(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Joint IRB-BSC-CRG Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 
Baldiri Reixac 10-12, 08020 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Amazon Search Science and AI, 08018 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Passeig Lluís 
Companys, 23, 08010 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Until a vaccine becomes available, the current repertoire of drugs is our only 
therapeutic asset to fight the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak. Indeed, emergency clinical 
trials have been launched to assess the effectiveness of many marketed drugs, 
tackling the decrease of viral load through several mechanisms. Here, we present 
an online resource, based on small-molecule bioactivity signatures and natural 
language processing, to expand the portfolio of compounds with potential to 
treat COVID-19. By comparing the set of drugs reported to be potentially active 
against SARS-CoV-2 to a universe of 1 million bioactive molecules, we identify 
compounds that display analogous chemical and functional features to the current 
COVID-19 candidates. Searches can be filtered by level of evidence and mechanism 
of action, and results can be restricted to drug molecules or include the much 
broader space of bioactive compounds. Moreover, we allow users to contribute 
COVID-19 drug candidates, which are automatically incorporated to the pipeline 
once per day. The computational platform, as well as the source code, is 
available at https://sbnb.irbbarcelona.org/covid19.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00420
PMCID: PMC7370532
PMID: 32672454

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.