336. Artif Intell Med. 2015 Oct;65(2):145-53. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2015.05.007. Epub 
2015 Jun 17.

Boosting drug named entity recognition using an aggregate classifier.

Korkontzelos I(1), Piliouras D(2), Dowsey AW(3), Ananiadou S(4).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining (NaCTeM), School of Computer Science, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 131 Princess 
Street, Manchester M1 7DN, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
Ioannis.Korkontzelos@manchester.ac.uk.
(2)National Centre for Text Mining (NaCTeM), School of Computer Science, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 131 Princess 
Street, Manchester M1 7DN, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
piliourd@cs.man.ac.uk.
(3)Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Institute of Human Development, 
Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, 
United Kingdom; Centre for Advanced Discovery and Experimental Therapeutics 
(CADET), The University of Manchester and Central Manchester University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, 
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9WL, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
Andrew.Dowsey@manchester.ac.uk.
(4)National Centre for Text Mining (NaCTeM), School of Computer Science, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 131 Princess 
Street, Manchester M1 7DN, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
Sophia.Ananiadou@manchester.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Drug named entity recognition (NER) is a critical step for complex 
biomedical NLP tasks such as the extraction of pharmacogenomic, pharmacodynamic 
and pharmacokinetic parameters. Large quantities of high quality training data 
are almost always a prerequisite for employing supervised machine-learning 
techniques to achieve high classification performance. However, the human labour 
needed to produce and maintain such resources is a significant limitation. In 
this study, we improve the performance of drug NER without relying exclusively 
on manual annotations.
METHODS: We perform drug NER using either a small gold-standard corpus (120 
abstracts) or no corpus at all. In our approach, we develop a voting system to 
combine a number of heterogeneous models, based on dictionary knowledge, 
gold-standard corpora and silver annotations, to enhance performance. To improve 
recall, we employed genetic programming to evolve 11 regular-expression patterns 
that capture common drug suffixes and used them as an extra means for 
recognition.
MATERIALS: Our approach uses a dictionary of drug names, i.e. DrugBank, a small 
manually annotated corpus, i.e. the pharmacokinetic corpus, and a part of the 
UKPMC database, as raw biomedical text. Gold-standard and silver annotated data 
are used to train maximum entropy and multinomial logistic regression 
classifiers.
RESULTS: Aggregating drug NER methods, based on gold-standard annotations, 
dictionary knowledge and patterns, improved the performance on models trained on 
gold-standard annotations, only, achieving a maximum F-score of 95%. In 
addition, combining models trained on silver annotations, dictionary knowledge 
and patterns are shown to achieve comparable performance to models trained 
exclusively on gold-standard data. The main reason appears to be the 
morphological similarities shared among drug names.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that gold-standard data are not a hard requirement for 
drug NER. Combining heterogeneous models build on dictionary knowledge can 
achieve similar or comparable classification performance with that of the best 
performing model trained on gold-standard annotations.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2015.05.007
PMID: 26116947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]