100. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Dec 21;19(Suppl 18):485. doi: 
10.1186/s12859-018-2503-9.

CAT: computer aided triage improving upon the Bayes risk through ε-refusal 
triage rules.

Hengartner N(1), Cuellar L(2), Wu XC(3), Tourassi G(4), Qiu J(4), Christian 
B(4), Bhattacharya T(2).

Author information:
(1)Los Alamos National Laboratory, PO Box 1663, Los Alamos, 87545, NM, USA. 
nickh@lanl.gov.
(2)Los Alamos National Laboratory, PO Box 1663, Los Alamos, 87545, NM, USA.
(3)Louisiana State University, 2020 Gravier Street, 3rd Floor, New Orleans, 
70112, LA, USA.
(4)Oak Ridge National Laboratory, PO Box 2008, Oak Ridge, 37831, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Manual extraction of information from electronic pathology (epath) 
reports to populate the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Result (SEER) 
database is labor intensive. Systematizing the data extraction automatically 
using machine-learning (ML) and natural language processing (NLP) is desirable 
to reduce the human labor required to populate the SEER database and to improve 
the timeliness of the data. This enables scaling up registry efficiency and 
collection of new data elements. To ensure the integrity, quality, and 
continuity of the SEER data, the misclassification error of ML and NPL 
algorithms needs to be negligible. Current algorithms fail to achieve the 
precision of human experts who can bring additional information in their 
assessments. Differences in registry format and the desire to develop a common 
information extraction platform further complicate the ML/NLP tasks. The purpose 
of our study is to develop triage rules to partially automate registry workflow 
to improve the precision of the auto-extracted information.
RESULTS: This paper presents a mathematical framework to improve the precision 
of a classifier beyond that of the Bayes classifier by selectively classifying 
item that are most likely to be correct. This results in a triage rule that only 
classifies a subset of the item. We characterize the optimal triage rule and 
demonstrate its usefulness in the problem of classifying cancer site from 
electronic pathology reports to achieve a desired precision.
CONCLUSIONS: From the mathematical formalism, we propose a heuristic estimate 
for triage rule based on post-processing the soft-max output from standard 
machine learning algorithms. We show, in test cases, that the triage rule 
significantly improve the classification accuracy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2503-9
PMCID: PMC6302364
PMID: 30577756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
data was obtained from the Louisiana registry under data use agreements, and the 
research was approved by the institutional review boards. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.