634. Brain Res. 2010 Dec 17;1366:27-37. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.10.032. Epub 
2010 Oct 20.

Interruption of β-catenin suppresses the EGFR pathway by blocking multiple 
oncogenic targets in human glioma cells.

Yue X(1), Lan F, Yang W, Yang Y, Han L, Zhang A, Liu J, Zeng H, Jiang T, Pu P, 
Kang C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, PR China.

Malignant gliomas are the most common type of intrinsic central nervous system 
(CNS) tumors with high mortality and morbidity. β-catenin is overexpressed in 
human glioblastoma and knockdown of β-catenin inhibits glioblastoma cell 
proliferation and invasive ability, and induces apoptotic cell death. 
Furthermore, treating the nude mice carrying established subcutaneous LN229 
gliomas with siRNA targeting β-catenin intratumorally also delayed the tumor 
growth. However, the mechanisms of down-regulation of β-catenin that represses 
glioblastoma malignancy behavior remain to be elucidated. We utilized 
text-mining of MEDLINE abstracts with natural language processing to establish 
the β-catenin biologic association network, and identified several interactions 
of this network with the EGFR pathway. In both in vitro and in vivo studies, our 
results confirmed down-regulation of β-catenin induced reduced expression of 
EGFR, STAT3 and AKT1 mRNA and protein, besides, the level of phosphorylated Akt 
also decreased. A similar reduction in expression of CyclinD1, MMP2 and MMP9, 
downstream genes of the EGFR pathway, was observed. These results suggest that 
the Wnt/β-catenin pathway regulates glioma cell proliferation and invasion, in 
part via the EGFR pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.10.032
PMID: 20969832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]