272. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2016 Aug;2016:1991-1994. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591115.

S2NI: a mobile platform for nutrition monitoring from spoken data.

Hezarjaribi N, Reynolds CA, Miller DT, Chaytor N, Ghasemzadeh H.

Diet and physical activity are important lifestyle and behavioral factors in 
self-management and prevention of many chronic diseases. Mobile sensors such as 
accelerometers have been used in the past to objectively measure physical 
activity or detect eating time. Diet monitoring, however, still relies on 
self-recorded data by end users where individuals use mobile devices for 
recording nutrition intake by either entering text or taking images. Such 
approaches have shown low adherence in technology adoption and achieve only 
moderate accuracy. In this paper, we propose development and validation of 
Speech-to-Nutrient-Information (S2NI), a comprehensive nutrition monitoring 
system that combines speech processing, natural language processing, and text 
mining in a unified platform to extract nutrient information such as calorie 
intake from spoken data. After converting the voice data to text, we identify 
food name and portion size information within the text. We then develop a tiered 
matching algorithm to search the food name in our nutrition database and to 
accurately compute calorie intake. Due to its pervasive nature and ease of use, 
S2NI enables users to report their diet routine more frequently and at anytime 
through their smartphone. We evaluate S2NI using real data collected with 10 
participants. Our experimental results show that S2NI achieves 80.6% accuracy in 
computing calorie intake.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591115
PMID: 28268720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]