265. Scientometrics. 2018;115(1):1-20. doi: 10.1007/s11192-017-2622-5. Epub 2017 Dec 
18.

Web of Science use in published research and review papers 1997-2017: a 
selective, dynamic, cross-domain, content-based analysis.

Li K(1), Rollins J(2), Yan E(1).

Author information:
(1)1Drexel University, 30N 33rd St., Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA.
(2)Clarivate Analytics, 50 California St., San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.

Clarivate Analytics's Web of Science (WoS) is the world's leading scientific 
citation search and analytical information platform. It is used as both a 
research tool supporting a broad array of scientific tasks across diverse 
knowledge domains as well as a dataset for large-scale data-intensive studies. 
WoS has been used in thousands of published academic studies over the past 
20Â years. It is also the most enduring commercial legacy of Eugene Garfield. 
Despite the central position WoS holds in contemporary research, the 
quantitative impact of WoS has not been previously examined by rigorous 
scientific studies. To better understand how this key piece of Eugene Garfield's 
heritage has contributed to science, we investigated the ways in which WoS (and 
associated products and features) is mentioned in a sample of 19,478 
English-language research and review papers published between 1997 and 2017, as 
indexed in WoS databases. We offered descriptive analyses of the distribution of 
the papers across countries, institutions and knowledge domains. We also used 
natural language processingtechniques to identify the verbs and nouns in the 
abstracts of these papers that are grammatically connected to WoS-related 
phrases. This is the first study to empirically investigate the documentation of 
the use of the WoS platform in published academic papers in both scientometric 
and linguistic terms.

DOI: 10.1007/s11192-017-2622-5
PMCID: PMC5838136
PMID: 29527070