324. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2009 Jul-Aug;16(4):590-5. doi: 10.1197/jamia.M3095. Epub 
2009 Apr 23.

A system for classifying disease comorbidity status from medical discharge 
summaries using automated hotspot and negated concept detection.

Ambert KH(1), Cohen AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health 
and Science University, Portland, OR, USA. ambertk@ohsu.edu

OBJECTIVE Free-text clinical reports serve as an important part of patient care 
management and clinical documentation of patient disease and treatment status. 
Free-text notes are commonplace in medical practice, but remain an under-used 
source of information for clinical and epidemiological research, as well as 
personalized medicine. The authors explore the challenges associated with 
automatically extracting information from clinical reports using their 
submission to the Integrating Informatics with Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) 
2008 Natural Language Processing Obesity Challenge Task. DESIGN A text mining 
system for classifying patient comorbidity status, based on the information 
contained in clinical reports. The approach of the authors incorporates a 
variety of automated techniques, including hot-spot filtering, negated concept 
identification, zero-vector filtering, weighting by inverse class-frequency, and 
error-correcting of output codes with linear support vector machines. 
MEASUREMENTS Performance was evaluated in terms of the macroaveraged F1 measure. 
RESULTS The automated system performed well against manual expert rule-based 
systems, finishing fifth in the Challenge's intuitive task, and 13(th) in the 
textual task. CONCLUSIONS The system demonstrates that effective comorbidity 
status classification by an automated system is possible.

DOI: 10.1197/jamia.M3095
PMCID: PMC2705265
PMID: 19390099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]