318. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2010 Jul-Sep;7(3):428-41. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2010.47.

BioLMiner System: interaction normalization task and interaction pair task in 
the BioCreative II.5 challenge.

Chen Y(1), Liu F, Manderick B.

Author information:
(1)Computational Modeling Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. 
yifechen@vub.ac.be

This paper describes a Biological Literature Miner (BioLMiner) system and its 
implementation. BioLMiner is a text mining system for biological literature, 
whose purpose is to extract useful information from biological literature, 
including gene and protein names, normalized gene and protein names, and 
protein-protein interaction pairs. BioLMiner has three main subsystems in a 
pipeline structure: a gene mention recognizer (GMRer), a gene normalizer (GNer), 
and a protein-protein interaction pair extractor (PPIEor). All these subsystems 
are developed based on the machine learning techniques including support vector 
machines (SVMs) and conditional random fields (CRFs) together with carefully 
designed informative features. At the same time, BioLMiner makes use of some 
biological specific resources and existing natural language processing tools. In 
order to evaluate and compare BioLMiner, it is adapted to participate in two 
tasks of the BioCreative II.5 challenge: interaction normalization task (INT) 
using GNer and interaction pair task (IPT) using PPIEor. Our system is among the 
highest performing systems on the two tasks from which it can be seen that GMRer 
provides a good support for the INT and IPT although its performance is not 
evaluated, and the methods developed in GNer and PPIEor are extended well to the 
BioCreative II.5 tasks.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2010.47
PMID: 20671315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]