343. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 22;469(4):1021-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.094. Epub 2015 Dec 22.

Effect of k-tuple length on sample-comparison with high-throughput sequencing 
data.

Wang Y(1), Lei X(2), Wang S(2), Wang Z(3), Song N(2), Zeng F(2), Chen T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Automation, Xiamen University, Fujian 361005, China. Electronic 
address: wangying@xmu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Automation, Xiamen University, Fujian 361005, China.
(3)Bioinformatics Division, TNLIST and Department of Automation, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China.
(4)Bioinformatics Division, TNLIST and Department of Computer Science and 
Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; Program in Computational 
Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 
90089, USA.

The high-throughput metagenomic sequencing offers a powerful technique to 
compare the microbial communities. Without requiring extra reference sequences, 
alignment-free models with short k-tuple (k = 2-10 bp) yielded promising 
results. Short k-tuples describe the overall statistical distribution, but is 
hard to capture the specific characteristics inside one microbial community. 
Longer k-tuple contains more abundant information. However, because the 
frequency vector of long k-tuple(k ≥ 30 bp) is sparse, the statistical measures 
designed for short k-tuples are not applicable. In our study, we considered each 
tuple as a meaningful word and then each sequencing data as a document composed 
of the words. Therefore, the comparison between two sequencing data is processed 
as "topic analysis of documents" in text mining. We designed a pipeline with 
long k-tuple features to compare metagenomic samples combined using algorithms 
from text mining and pattern recognition. The pipeline is available at 
http://culotuple.codeplex.com/. Experiments show that our pipeline with long 
k-tuple features: ①separates genomes with high similarity; ②outperforms short 
k-tuple models in all experiments. When k ≥ 12, the short k-tuple measures are 
not applicable anymore. When k is between 20 and 40, long k-tuple pipeline 
obtains much better grouping results; ③is free from the effect of sequencing 
platforms/protocols. ③We obtained meaningful and supported biological results on 
the 40-tuples selected for comparison.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.094
PMID: 26721429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]