525. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Jan 25;19(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2029-1.

Deep learning of mutation-gene-drug relations from the literature.

Lee K(1), Kim B(2), Choi Y(1), Kim S(1), Shin W(2), Lee S(1), Park S(1), Kim 
S(1), Tan AC(3), Kang J(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Bioinformatics, Korea University, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Translational Bioinformatics and Cancer Systems Biology Laboratory, Division 
of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA. aikchoon.tan@ucdenver.edu.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 
South Korea. kangj@korea.ac.kr.
(5)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Bioinformatics, Korea University, 
Seoul, South Korea. kangj@korea.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Molecular biomarkers that can predict drug efficacy in cancer 
patients are crucial components for the advancement of precision medicine. 
However, identifying these molecular biomarkers remains a laborious and 
challenging task. Next-generation sequencing of patients and preclinical models 
have increasingly led to the identification of novel gene-mutation-drug 
relations, and these results have been reported and published in the scientific 
literature.
RESULTS: Here, we present two new computational methods that utilize all the 
PubMed articles as domain specific background knowledge to assist in the 
extraction and curation of gene-mutation-drug relations from the literature. The 
first method uses the Biomedical Entity Search Tool (BEST) scoring results as 
some of the features to train the machine learning classifiers. The second 
method uses not only the BEST scoring results, but also word vectors in a deep 
convolutional neural network model that are constructed from and trained on 
numerous documents such as PubMed abstracts and Google News articles. Using the 
features obtained from both the BEST search engine scores and word vectors, we 
extract mutation-gene and mutation-drug relations from the literature using 
machine learning classifiers such as random forest and deep convolutional neural 
networks. Our methods achieved better results compared with the state-of-the-art 
methods. We used our proposed features in a simple machine learning model, and 
obtained F1-scores of 0.96 and 0.82 for mutation-gene and mutation-drug relation 
classification, respectively. We also developed a deep learning classification 
model using convolutional neural networks, BEST scores, and the word embeddings 
that are pre-trained on PubMed or Google News data. Using deep learning, the 
classification accuracy improved, and F1-scores of 0.96 and 0.86 were obtained 
for the mutation-gene and mutation-drug relations, respectively.
CONCLUSION: We believe that our computational methods described in this research 
could be used as an important tool in identifying molecular biomarkers that 
predict drug responses in cancer patients. We also built a database of these 
mutation-gene-drug relations that were extracted from all the PubMed abstracts. 
We believe that our database can prove to be a valuable resource for precision 
medicine researchers.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2029-1
PMCID: PMC5784504
PMID: 29368597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.