355. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 5;12(7):e0179926. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179926. 
eCollection 2017.

Assigning factuality values to semantic relations extracted from biomedical 
research literature.

Kilicoglu H(1), Rosemblat G(1), Rindflesch TC(1).

Author information:
(1)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, U.S. National 
Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, 20894, United States of America.

Biomedical knowledge claims are often expressed as hypotheses, speculations, or 
opinions, rather than explicit facts (propositions). Much biomedical text mining 
has focused on extracting propositions from biomedical literature. One such 
system is SemRep, which extracts propositional content in the form of 
subject-predicate-object triples called predications. In this study, we 
investigated the feasibility of assessing the factuality level of SemRep 
predications to provide more nuanced distinctions between predications for 
downstream applications. We annotated semantic predications extracted from 500 
PubMed abstracts with seven factuality values (fact, probable, possible, 
doubtful, counterfact, uncommitted, and conditional). We extended a rule-based, 
compositional approach that uses lexical and syntactic information to predict 
factuality levels. We compared this approach to a supervised machine learning 
method that uses a rich feature set based on the annotated corpus. Our results 
indicate that the compositional approach is more effective than the machine 
learning method in recognizing the factuality values of predications. The 
annotated corpus as well as the source code and binaries for factuality 
assignment are publicly available. We will also incorporate the results of the 
better performing compositional approach into SemMedDB, a PubMed-scale 
repository of semantic predications extracted using SemRep.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179926
PMCID: PMC5497973
PMID: 28678823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.