636. J Vis Exp. 2020 May 15;(159):10.3791/60794. doi: 10.3791/60794.

Implementation of a Real-Time Psychosis Risk Detection and Alerting System Based 
on Electronic Health Records using CogStack.

Wang T(1), Oliver D(2), Msosa Y(3), Colling C(4), Spada G(2), Roguski ≈Å(5), 
Folarin A(3), Stewart R(6), Roberts A(7), Dobson RJB(8), Fusar-Poli P(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London; tao.wang@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Early Psychosis: Interventions and Clinical-detection (EPIC) lab, Department 
of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's 
College London.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London.
(4)National Institute for Health Research, Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, 
South London and Maudsley National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust.
(5)Institute of Health Informatics, University College London.
(6)National Institute for Health Research, Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, 
South London and Maudsley National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust; 
Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London.
(7)Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London; National Institute for 
Health Research, Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, South London and Maudsley 
National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust.
(8)Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London; National Institute for 
Health Research, Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, South London and Maudsley 
National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust; Institute of Health Informatics, 
University College London; Health Data Research UK London, University College 
London.
(9)Early Psychosis: Interventions and Clinical-detection (EPIC) lab, Department 
of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's 
College London; National Institute for Health Research, Maudsley Biomedical 
Research Centre, South London and Maudsley National Health Service (NHS) 
Foundation Trust; OASIS service, South London and Maudsley National Health 
Service (NHS) Foundation Trust; Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of Pavia.

Recent studies have shown that an automated, lifespan-inclusive, 
transdiagnostic, and clinically based, individualized risk calculator provides a 
powerful system for supporting the early detection of individuals at-risk of 
psychosis at a large scale, by leveraging electronic health records (EHRs). This 
risk calculator has been externally validated twice and is undergoing 
feasibility testing for clinical implementation. Integration of this risk 
calculator in clinical routine should be facilitated by prospective feasibility 
studies, which are required to address pragmatic challenges, such as missing 
data, and the usability of this risk calculator in a real-world and routine 
clinical setting. Here, we present an approach for a prospective implementation 
of a real-time psychosis risk detection and alerting service in a real-world EHR 
system. This method leverages the CogStack platform, which is an open-source, 
lightweight, and distributed information retrieval and text extraction system. 
The CogStack platform incorporates a set of services that allow for full-text 
search of clinical data, lifespan-inclusive, real-time calculation of psychosis 
risk, early risk-alerting to clinicians, and the visual monitoring of patients 
over time. Our method includes: 1) ingestion and synchronization of data from 
multiple sources into the CogStack platform, 2) implementation of a risk 
calculator, whose algorithm was previously developed and validated, for timely 
computation of a patient's risk of psychosis, 3) creation of interactive 
visualizations and dashboards to monitor patients' health status over time, and 
4) building automated alerting systems to ensure that clinicians are notified of 
patients at-risk, so that appropriate actions can be pursued. This is the first 
ever study that has developed and implemented a similar detection and alerting 
system in clinical routine for early detection of psychosis.

DOI: 10.3791/60794
PMCID: PMC7272223
PMID: 32478737

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors have nothing to 
disclose.