176. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2017;235:131-135.

Linked Data Applications Through Ontology Based Data Access in Clinical 
Research.

Kock-Schoppenhauer AK(1), Kamann C(1), Ulrich H(1), Duhm-Harbeck P(1), Ingenerf 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)IT for Clinical Research, Lübeck (ITCR-L), University of Lübeck, Germany.

Clinical care and research data are widely dispersed in isolated systems based 
on heterogeneous data models. Biomedicine predominantly makes use of connected 
datasets based on the Semantic Web paradigm. Initiatives like Bio2RDF created 
Resource Description Framework (RDF) versions of Omics resources, enabling 
sophisticated Linked Data applications. In contrast, electronic healthcare 
records (EHR) data are generated and processed in diverse clinical subsystems 
within hospital information systems (HIS). Usually, each of them utilizes a 
relational database system with a different proprietary schema. Semantic 
integration and access to the data is hardly possible. This paper describes ways 
of using Ontology Based Data Access (OBDA) for bridging the semantic gap between 
existing raw data and user-oriented views supported by ontology-based queries. 
Based on mappings between entities of data schemas and ontologies data can be 
made available as materialized or virtualized RDF triples ready for querying and 
processing. Our experiments based on CentraXX for biobank and study management 
demonstrate the advantages of abstracting away from low level details and 
semantic mediation. Furthermore, it becomes clear that using a professional 
platform for Linked Data applications is recommended due to the inherent 
complexity, the inconvenience to confront end users with SPARQL, and scalability 
and performance issues.

PMID: 28423769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]